2025 OCP APAC Summit Keynote — Google

Please welcome Google's Director of ML Systems and Cloud AI, Chris Verne.

Good morning. I get the coveted last speech before lunch spot, so please bear with me, even if you're hungry. The other advantage of going last is I got to see all of the great presentations that all the partners have given before me. And it was really encouraging to see the common themes around collaboration, around openness, and around the challenges of AI. So, surprise, surprise, I'm going to talk about AI. Now, I've been in the industry for about 30 years, and I love the chart that Robert put up from AMD that showed all these technological revolutions over the last 30, 40 years. But I really believe that AI may be the most transformative. You know, we all know AI has captured the imagination of billions of people around the world. And it's captured not only imagination, but I think it's captured mind share of IT leaders and business professionals across many industries. Now, for the true potential of AI to be realized, we need to establish trust in the underlying systems and trust in the underlying infrastructure. So that's what I'm going to talk about today. It's no surprise that over the past few years, Google has seen a step-function increase in AI and machine learning deployments. Again, no surprise, driving significant increased demand for space and power to house and drive these massive deployments.

Now, this growth is fueled by significant increases in computational performance, both at a device level but also at a pod level. Google recently released our seventh-generation TPU, Ironwood. And if you compare the pod level configuration for Ironwood to the previous generation, it's 10 times higher performance. But at the same time performance is increasing, power efficiency is increasing as well. So Ironwood is also five times as power efficient as its V5 predecessor. And if you compare it to V2, which was released less than a decade ago, it's 29 times more efficient. Now, while individual TPUs and other devices are becoming more power efficient, the trend towards larger devices as well as more densely packed pods is driving overall power density much, much higher. If we look at a rack level, for example, the trend for rack-level power for traditional compute and storage has remained and is projected to maintain fairly constant. But if you compare that to racks that are dedicated to AI training and serving, significant and rapid growth in rack-level power, and it's expected to continue for the next few years. So, capable and efficient power distribution, as well as cooling strategies, are really key to support this ongoing growth.

Now, to address these challenges, Google leverages our long-standing collaboration with partners in OCP to drive industry collaboration and open innovation in infrastructure. At the OCP EMEA summit earlier this year, we talked about this transition from traditional 48-volt level infrastructure to plus or minus 400-volt, which will enable rack-level power to increase from 100 kilowatts up to 1 megawatt. Now traditional rack solutions integrate the power and the compute within the same rack. But as part of Mount Diablo, we're moving all of the power conversion to a separate rack, a disaggregated power rack. Now, as the power increases for these GPU and TPU systems, they generate significant heat, obviously, especially in high-density clusters. So, cooling itself becomes more energy-intensive, therefore, increasing the potential for overall carbon management within the data center. The growth in data center infrastructure presents real opportunities for innovation in cooling as well as power. Now, while Google's been deploying liquid in our data centers since about 2018 and in other niche applications, there have been liquid deployments for decades. We're seeing a rapid increase in liquid deployments at the data center level. And so water has the capability of conducting heat much better than air, and it can transport 3,000 to 4,000 times more heat per unit volume than air. So we released our 0.75 spec for our Deschutes CDU, and that'll be available on the portal soon. These are just two recent examples of Google's long-standing and deep engagement with partners via OCP. Together, we've aligned the ecosystem across numerous domains, from security to sustainability to hardware management, across system domains, from compute to storage to networking and obviously accelerators. And we've worked with partners at device level, at the system level, and the data center level. And so I'm continuing this common theme you've heard all morning about the importance of openness and collaboration and the value of OCP.

Now, all of these rapid technology advances are really required for AI deployments at scale. And again, collaboration and open standards are really critical to addressing these technology challenges. So I want to talk a little bit about, let's get back to the theme of powering trust. I'm going to talk about security, I'm going to talk about resilience, and I'm going to talk a little bit about validation. Because we need to build security and resilience from the ground up in order to, again, ensure that there's trust in the underlying infrastructure. And Google is teaming up with many partners in OCP to address all the aspects of security, again, from the fundamental silicon level to the management level and to auditing, the auditing ecosystem. But building a sufficient, secure architecture really requires a composable architecture that can be adapted to meet the specific needs of compute, storage, of accelerators, and also application-specific devices. And to build a truly composable architecture, we need open standards. We need to leverage open standards and we need to leverage modularity.

So, Caliptra, I know one of the other presenters talked about Caliptra. It's an open source project that provides an integrated root of trust at the silicon level, specifically targeting data center class hardware and its core function is to establish a secure foundation again at the silicon level. It provides a fundamental set of capabilities for an SoC: unique identity, a measured boot process to ensure that the right firmware is loaded on the device, attestation capabilities to verify the system state through cryptography. Now, LOCK, I think LOCK was mentioned in one of the other presentations as well. LOCK is providing cryptographic key management for storage devices, specifically NVMe SSDs, and it provides a key management solution that contains elements outside the device itself, which protects the device in case of either threat or loss, which significantly increases the overall security posture of storage. SAFE is another OCP initiative that Google's working on with key partners. This provides a framework to standardize the auditing process. And the outcome of this will be a vetted set of partners who can perform audits. This will really expand the availability of auditing services across the industry and also save system companies and technology companies time and effort. Again, the intent is to really expand auditing capability across the industry. Google and Microsoft spearheaded the creation of SAFE in 2023 in collaboration with OCP and other partners who have joined.

So, let's talk a little bit about resilience. Another key element of building trust is building resilience into the underlying infrastructure. And Google's working with a number of partners on key aspects of resilience. One I want to talk about is silent data corruption. It's one such area of deep collaboration with partners across the industry. And as we scale compute and storage, the frequency and the impact of silent data corruption has the potential to grow significantly. Some history: Google shared our initial findings on SDC in 2021 in a paper titled Cores That Don't Count, which really talked about the challenges of finding silent data corruption in hyperscale environments. Following that in 2022, a group of partners came together in OCP, AMD, ARM, Google, Intel, Meta, Microsoft, and NVIDIA came together to really dedicate resources to silent data corruption. And in 2024, the server compliance resilience spec 1.0 was published, standardizing key elements such as test inputs and outputs, metrics, part history, and also test frameworks and flows. Now, one of the things this resulted in was a fairly unique collaboration between industry and academia. Google and partners funded over a million dollars for universities to really focus on novel techniques of addressing both finding but also resolving silent data corruption. And we continue to believe that this type of open partnership between academia and industry is really critical to success going forward. So, very proud of this.

Now, one of the core challenges of AI is to ensure that the subtle hardware errors that can manifest as silent data corruption don't undermine the integrity and the accuracy and the trustworthiness of the models that are deployed at scale, which is important given the unique workload characteristics of AI. So, another set of partners have come together and been collaborating on a paper specifically focused on addressing silent data corruption in AI. And this set of partners brings together a wealth of experience in high-performance computing, in hyperscale AI deployments, and one of the outcomes of this is to direct future research into silent data corruption.

So, let's talk a bit about validation. When you're developing all this great technology around security or around resilience, you need methods to validate that you're delivering what you say you're going to deliver. So, it's another area that Google collaborates with partners on. And we really need to continue to invest in validation. So there's a set of partners that came together and defined three GPU specifications at OCP over the last few years. These were specifications aimed at standardizing things like firmware updates and RAS and management interfaces for accelerators. This is really crucial for enabling seamless, impactless updates, ensuring consistent error reporting, and programmatic control across what's becoming an increasingly diverse multi-vendor accelerator environment that we're seeing in our data centers today. And the goal is really to boost operational efficiency, reliability, and interoperability. And the 1.0 versions of these specs were published last year. Now, we talked about validation. One of the things key to effective validation is improving debug and RAS capability. So, Google, Microsoft, and AMD have come together to develop standards for how system crashes are captured and analyzed, to define requirements for crash dumps, and to create standardized processes for collecting debug data in production. And so we're working together on impactless firmware updates for CPUs, for example. This is really important, as I mentioned before, about the heterogeneous nature of accelerators in the data center. Well, there's also increasingly heterogeneous CPU topologies in the data center. That drives the potential for more frequent updates in the data center, which means the impact of seamless and non-disruptive firmware updates is really increasingly critical.

One other area of validation that Google's been working on is the development of a standard test module to support the new APEC-IO format. Google developed a standard test module to support the PCIe compliance testing as well as the electrical and protocol testing which ensures interoperability. And one of my colleagues, Erica, is going to be giving a talk on this tomorrow afternoon. So please check that on your agenda.

Okay, so before I close, I want to talk a bit about this wonderful place we've all gathered, which is Taiwan. I mentioned I've been in the industry about 30 years, and a third of that time I've spent living and working in Taiwan. And I think Taiwan really has a unique place, or maybe a unique place outside the U.S. in terms of what comes together to deliver success, openness and collaboration in this space. So many of the partners that I mentioned that Google's working with are in Taiwan. And Google has a track record of sustained investment in infrastructure here in Taiwan. We take advantage of a unique combination of capabilities that Taiwan offers. And since we opened our data center and launched our cloud region over a decade ago, we've continued to invest in infrastructure, in new skills and new capabilities from core engineering to manufacturing to sustainability. So, when I talk about unique capabilities, what do I mean? So, first, there is a deep engineering and supply chain expertise in Taiwan built over many decades. Second, we have the key system design and manufacturing partners here in Taiwan that work on many of the systems that we deploy in our data centers worldwide. And we also have technology partners here on the island working on core technology across silicon, across cooling, across thermal, across power. And in the past year, we just celebrated the 10th anniversary of a data center right down the road in Changhua. This proximity of capabilities in a relatively small space, at least for Google, has proven to provide tremendous efficiencies in terms of decision-making and execution. So, in closing, I want to echo the sentiment you've heard all morning about the importance of openness and collaboration. And I think the Taiwan ecosystem is one that's uniquely positioned for leadership in data center technology, both at a chip level and at the system level. So let's work together to continue our collaboration and raise the bar on security, reliability, and validation together. Thank you.
