AI Infrastructure Rack Management: Exploring Scalable Solutions Through Open-source Collaboration

Okay, hello everybody. My name is Brian Vandekiering. I'm one of the co-chairs of the OpenRMC group that this discussion is about. Anil will introduce himself in a few minutes when he covers. What we're going to do is go over three sections here. First, an overview of what rack manager is and why customers use it. Then, we're going to go over some of the problems that the legacy rack manager has when it comes to AI infrastructure, so it generates all sorts of new problems. And then, finally, Anil is going to talk about Meta's approach to this and some of the problems they're facing and trying to solve.

So, first of all, what is rack manager? Most of you probably know what this is, but it's something that came about in the 2017–2018 timeframe and then died off for a while. And now we're seeing, largely due to AI infrastructure, a large comeback in the need for a rack manager. At a high level, it sits between your high-level data center management software and the nodes you're managing yourself. So in this example, BMCs, but it also could be CDUs, power shelves, or any other network switch, whatever. It manages everything in that rack, and it's responsible for that rack.

The legacy benefits are: it simplifies management. It's one endpoint to manage instead of all the various endpoints and protocols that you need to understand. It improves scale-out management. A colleague and I did a good job of talking about how we only have to talk about one device, which is actually managing twenty. You can scale out and do your controls and your telemetry at a much more efficient level. And then, for some customers, it will improve their security, too. If you don't trust the devices in the rack itself, maybe there's an old CDU or something that you wouldn't want to be exposed to attack, you can make that rack manager a firewall. And then the rack manager manages the individual devices, and all you're doing is talking to the rack manager. If you can secure that, you don't have to worry about the other components as much.

So where would a rack manager sit? Honestly, anywhere. I've talked to customers who make it a dedicated compute system. I think Meta, you just put out Catalina. It has an OpenRMC as literally a different system that's got a processor in it. It could be a top-of-rack management switch, typically running some kind of x86 processor running SONiC or whatever the switching software is. You can load it in there. We've seen it in power shelves. There's usually a BMC in a power shelf, ASPEED 2600 or, in the future, 2700, where it could sit. A CDU could even sit in one of the BMC nodes, and it could become what I call the "plus one," where it manages all the other BMCs in the rack. Or, it doesn't even have to sit in the rack, if it's complicated enough. And again, as we talked about, making decisions at the edge probably takes an x86 server or a powerful ARM server, and so that might be one system across multiple racks.

The point is, it doesn't really matter where it sits; it matters what it's doing, and that it is seeing the rack as one item itself, so the rack with all its scale-up can be managed as a single system. It's a single system that you need to manage, and then it takes care of everything else.

I mentioned at the beginning, OpenRMC. We are a committee that works hard at trying to solve some of these problems. Traditionally, when it first started, it was accepting hardware and software contributions. Now, we're not as prescriptive on that, and we're focused more on the northbound API, the Redfish layer, and how you talk to that rack manager. Southbound, from the rack manager to the devices, there will be all sorts of protocols. We're not dictating that. We are simply saying, for northbound, how you actually talk to the rack manager device yourself: here is the set of Redfish APIs that you should implement and you should support.

So in the 1.1 version, which is already out, you can see the list of features that it was focused on. In 1.2, which will be out soon, we're adding some telemetry and composability Redfish APIs. And then our next step, which we hope you would all join us and help figure out, is how to solve some of these advanced AI problems. How to solve the scale-up problem. We've solved scale-out largely, but we need to solve the scale-up issue. How we handle the power problems that AI infrastructure adds. And how we add all the layers of aggregation. The current OpenRMC design assumes a single layer, but we are starting to see the need for row managers, pod managers, cluster managers, room managers, and so on. How do you handle all those layers of aggregation?

Okay, so the next two slides are about some of the problems that that last bullet point on the last slide was trying to get at. Which is, what are the problems with AI infrastructure that are different from legacy that we need to go figure out? And we will be figuring that out over the next few months as we lead into the global summit.

The first is, the hardware of AI infrastructure is a lot more complex. It's a lot more disaggregated. In a traditional legacy infrastructure, the server nodes handle their own power, handle their own cooling, handle their own PCIe management. With a disaggregated AI infrastructure, the cooling via liquid cooling is coming from the outside. The power is coming from power shelves or PDUs. You might have scale-up fabric switches or other switches that are connecting all the GPUs together. Those things all exist outside the box, so the BMC of the node won't know about those things. So now you need a rack manager to help understand all of the connections between all of these devices so that you can make better decisions. If, for example, you want to power on a system, it's not just good enough anymore to go to the BMC and say, power on. You've got to make sure it's got appropriate cooling, power, that all the links are set up before you power on the device. So you need to see this rack as one entity.

Thermal and power challenges—you see that all over the expo: liquid cooling, or maybe even immersion cooling in the future. The problem, and Google mentioned it in the keynote, is the constant flux of power and thermals. They go up and down rapidly. You need to be much more reactive. If you don't have a rack manager in your rack and you've just got data center management software talking to thousands of nodes, it just can't talk fast enough to make the instant decisions down to the millisecond level of what you have to do if there's a spike in thermal or a spike in power. So this rack manager really is the way you're going to solve that constant movement of up and down as these GPU nodes come up and go down as needed.

And then finally, the health and reliability challenges. AI infrastructure runs on top of traditional HPC infrastructure. The way HPC infrastructure works, it's very parallelized. If a job goes out to literally thousands of nodes, and when it comes back, it puts it all together. If you have one node out there that goes down or is even slowing down, it impacts the entire workload. This is different than legacy infrastructure, where if you have a node down, that's probably okay: you rip out the node, you put a new one in, you migrate your VMs or whatever. You can't do that with AI infrastructure. With one slow node, you're slowing down potentially thousands of other nodes, so that's a real problem.

And what we've got to get to is, ideally, predictive failure. That's always been, in my 25 years in this industry, the goal, to try to predict failures. If we can't do that, we at least need to detect issues instantly. We've got to know exactly when it happens, because we need to be able to move those workloads and create a point in time where we can then transfer that over to another system. So we need predictive failure algorithms, much more intelligent power algorithms to go ahead and manage these issues.

So I'm going to turn it over to Anil now, and he's going to talk about some of the problems that Meta is seeing and how they're attacking these problems. Thank you, Brian.

So, I'll make two points first. One is, the content was put together by my colleague, Han Wang, and he could not make it, so I'm presenting on his behalf. Bear with me; I'll try my best. Second thing is, you're almost, I think, 10 minutes away from the beer, so I'll try to make it as fast as possible, okay?

So Brian talked about, at the rack manager level, what challenges in the AI infrastructure we are going to see. Let me talk, from the Meta point of view, about some of the experience we already have. First, scale-up and scale-out. We are actually doing both. Scale-out, we have done quite a bit in the past, typical CPUs, compute infrastructure, so we understand how to manage those. Scale-up is a new challenge for us, and when we put both of them together, that becomes a more complex challenge for us.

First of all, these machines are expensive, so we need to make sure that we are maximizing them from a user's point of view, and that puts a lot of challenge on the management side, managing the machine itself. Location and interconnect are important, because scale-up and scale-out both require that racks are not only within one bay, but also across the data center and across multiple locations.

And when it comes to training workload in AI, we have inference and training, and training workloads add one more challenge: there's only one single job running across the whole infrastructure. So, as Brian was mentioning, if even one single machine has some issue, how do we monitor that? The whole workload is going to be impacted. Prediction and correlation are important, because if there is an issue somewhere in the machine, maybe it is detected somewhere else, because somebody else was requesting that memory read—the concept of RDMA, remote direct memory access. So the machine that detects the problem, the problem might actually be somewhere else. How do we figure that out? It's not easy. So we're running into that challenge as well.

And, of course, you already heard in the keynote that LLaMA 3 was already published, and LLaMA 4 will be published, and the whole workload is growing. The hardware infrastructure is also growing, from just tens of GPUs to hundreds, then a few thousand, and now you're talking about 100,000. It's a huge infrastructure that we are building.

The kind of failures we see today—there was a session this morning; so far for our LLaMA 3 training job we have used roughly about 32,000 GPUs. This is the kind of fault we see, a part of the faults. If you look at the faulty GPU and GPU HBM, those are the two largest buckets, and, of course, software bugs. Different kinds of faults. How we manage, maintain, and minimize the impacts of faults is a big challenge for us.

And finally, what do we want to see in the future? Today we have legacy hardware management. The rack manager that we use today in the rack is primarily to manage the liquid cooling—that's the primary use case for us right now—and we need to expand beyond that. Where we want to go is to have more analysis and predictive techniques implemented in the rack manager, and a lot of this intelligent management and automation, so that self-contained infrastructure can manage the events, and from a deployment point of view: a machine is failing, predict it; before the machine fails, take the machine out of the cluster, migrate the workload, take the machine down, go through repair—auto-repair. As much automation as we can build in is what we need here.

With that, call to action. Join the co-design of new BMC and new RMC. Join new rack manager intelligent design, and think and design for big. It's a big problem, so the solution has to be big. And join the OCP and OpenRMC project group to help solve these problems.

Brian, do you want to say anything? If you have any more questions, you can come by the AMI booth or the Meta booth. We've got a demo running, showing a rack manager. Happy to show how we've implemented it and how the community would like it to be implemented. Any questions? Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
