AI System Validation — Meta Perspective

Hi everybody, my name is Carlos Fernandez, and today we're going to be having a brief discussion about some of the strategies that we use at Meta to perform AI systems validation. I'm in the release-to-production team. Our team specializes in taking systems through the entire validation life cycle: integration, testing, and validation, then finally placement in the data center and bringing up into our data center tooling.

The agenda is: we're going to discuss briefly the Grand Teton training platform that we have downstairs in our booth—you can see a really nice 3D diagram. The testing methodology that was used on that system, maybe go through some debug examples, and discuss a call to action.

Now, looking at Grand Teton training, a couple of folks from my team have presented this diagram. We have two CPUs on the system. The system is connected to our front-end network via two NICs. We also have a PCIe switch, which has eight network interfaces that are used for the RDMA or scale-out network. And then we have multiple accelerators behind this PCIe switch, which are interconnected by a high-speed, low-latency interconnect.

Going into a little bit more detail about the system topology: the CPU-to-CPU interconnect that we saw up top exposes all of the cores and all the system memory to the operating system and workload as one continuous resource. The CPU-to-accelerator bus, which in this case is PCIe, offloads highly parallelizable tasks into the accelerator. And the accelerator interconnect, such as NVLink, provides a very high-bandwidth, low-latency interconnect between the accelerators themselves.

Looking at how the data typically flows on the system, top to bottom: typically the CPU will initialize the job that needs acceleration. That job will identify all of the resources that are available on the system and assign jobs that are highly parallelizable into the accelerators. We move from the CPU into the PCIe switch, and then down into the accelerator, as well as in reverse. At times, when we're using the system as part of a large cluster, the system uses the back-end networks to expose itself to the cluster as a resource to a large job or a large pool of accelerators, where we can load and offload data from the system in a synchronized manner.

This diagram here shows a much more simplified version of the architectural diagram we showed before, and we're going to use it to show how we stress the system to increase resiliency over time. In general, if we look at the right side of this diagram, we see the compute side of the system, where we have DDR5 system memory, we have the CPU, we have a high-speed interconnect like PCIe, we have the accelerator, its interconnects, and the high-bandwidth memory that's attached to the accelerator for offloading and storage of the workload that's actually running on the accelerator.

When we talk about accelerator stress, we typically break things down into two key components. We look at the compute side of the accelerator, and then we look at the HBM side of the accelerator. The compute side on the accelerator itself is very similar in some ways to what you see today in general compute. It's a little bit more simplified in the sense that there are a large number of cores—thousands of cores within the accelerator—as opposed to maybe 100 cores on a traditional compute system. But the instruction pipeline of these cores is significantly smaller, and the support and instruction set is also significantly smaller.

For these cores, we typically use the fundamental operation unit of matrix multiply, which is what all of our accelerated workloads use to load the accelerator and mimic our production workload. To further fine-tune the loading that we do on the accelerator, we do sweeps across different matrix sizes—some of these matrices can be 4,000 by 4,000, 8,000 by 8,000. And then we do sweeps across different data types, which utilize different registers in the core of the accelerator itself. By sweeping across the different data types, we also make sure that within the execution of the data in the accelerator, we're actually utilizing as much of the resources in the accelerator as part of our testing.

Finally, we also stress the high-bandwidth memory in two main ways. We do sequential stress, which attempts to collapse the data I/O between the accelerator and the memory. And we also do stress across different access patterns to stress the protocol—things like refresh rates, and things along those lines.

On the compute side, we take a similar approach. We look at things from the cores, the pipelines on the CPU, the interconnect performance, and the I/O throughput. On the cores themselves, like I mentioned before, the instruction set on the CPU side tends to be a lot larger. So our workloads sweep across a large number of arithmetic operations to load the traditional compute cores and basically put the cores in a way that mimics what we would do in production.

We also spend a lot of time testing the I/O throughput of the CPUs themselves, making sure that we can hit the latency numbers that we expect to see across the interconnects like PCIe, making sure that signal integrity is maintained across high-speed buses, especially new buses like PCIe Gen 5, PCIe Gen 6. And whenever there are errors that are reported across these high-speed buses, we have sufficient information to be able to do fault isolation and potentially perform repairs.

The memory subsystem of the compute side of the system—these are typically traditional DDR buses. These buses are much narrower than the HBM buses, but they also have their own challenges. A lot of times, the DDR bus uses socketed memory, which introduces instability in terms of signal integrity, etc. So we do things like adjust data patterns, adjust access patterns to try to maximize the bus utilization and sweep the PCIe protocol in a way that mimics how the system is going to be used in production.

For example, thermally loading the DDR subsystem to see how the memory controller is able to adjust refresh rates and make sure our data in the memory remains coherent and stable whenever the memory gets very hot. And we also do a lot of power spiking studies. For example, how does the system power subsystem react if we do fast loading of the system and then fast offloading of all the CPU cores or the memory? Do we hit any issues in terms of random power-offs or random events where the system becomes unstable because of the way we're loading and unloading it?

Another aspect that we look at on the systems themselves is system performance as a health indicator. We run a lot of test cases that focus on measuring high-speed I/O performance. For example, from the CPU side to the caches—that's going to get the CPU extremely hot, and it's going to stress the thermal subsystem of the CPU itself. We've noticed that these kinds of tests expose marginalities across things like heat sink placement or TIM material application. And whenever there's any problem around the thermal subsystem, we typically see things like thermal throttles being applied, a reduction in overall bandwidth of the CPU, which can eventually lead to the system just powering off.

Another common issue that we see is these correctable error floods. These correctable error floods can also impact performance. Because, typically, on the memory subsystem side, if these correctable error floods trigger and it rights back to the memory, you're essentially eating away at the performance of the memory channel. By eating away at the performance, your workload at some point will see that reduction in performance. And it could also impact the amount of time you spend, for example, in model training.

Another significant problem here is that by experiencing consistent correctable errors, you're sort of eating away at the RAS of the system and exposing your system to a more catastrophic situation, like taking an uncorrectable error, which has the probability of causing a full system crash and interrupting the overall workload that's running on the system.

On the accelerator side, thermal issues do tend to be also catastrophic if not caught in time. GPUs can fall off the bus, interrupting jobs on, like, 100K clusters. And these are very expensive interruptions. We have to go back from our previous checkpoint, reload where we're at, and continue the training.

So, what kind of tests do we run that help us yield the highest amount of issues on the system? Typically it's our concurrency testing. Concurrency testing is when we fully load the system across all the components and interconnects, which is very representative of what actually happens on the system while it's in the data center on a production workload. And this is where we see things like silent errors come up, uncorrectable errors come up from memory, random drops in performance from PCIe.

So I'll quickly ask the audience: does anybody know what a silent error is and how we are able to see these errors? No? Yes. So, a silent error is essentially a bit flip that happens somewhere but is undetectable to the system itself. And normal production workloads do not have resiliency built into the workload to detect silent errors. You'll just get some sort of workload exception.

So, for example, the simplest thing could be: you try to add a number and a letter, and you get a "not a number" type of exception. And these errors can occur, for example, if you read from an incorrect memory location because of a logic error on the memory controller. When you read from an incorrect memory location, the check bits generated from that memory location will be correct. The data will be upstreamed into the core. The core will try to do some operation. And then you might end up in a situation where you're doing some sort of illegal operation or executing some sort of illegal instruction.

How exactly do we catch these kinds of problems? These kinds of problems are typically caught in workloads that verify the data pattern that we are actually consuming from the core. So, for example, we have workloads that will load the accelerator to perform some task, preload the answer of some computation in memory, and then repeat that same computation hundreds of thousands of times until we get a mismatch from where we're reading from memory in HBM to where we have pre-stored as the initial value.

What have we seen that causes these kinds of highly complex problems? Typically, concurrency testing because of thermal loading on HBM. When you load HBM, due to the density of the package, we have seen situations where you get the right data from memory, but from an incorrect location. And our workload is able to detect this mismatch and report it out.

So, here's an example of a silent error that we have from one of our systems where we expected some huge number coming out of HBM, and the value that we actually got back was nowhere near the ballpark of what we were expecting to read. When we root-caused this issue, it was root-caused to a logic issue on the memory controller side. But these kinds of errors in production are serious because they can happen on achieved paths on the system and escape from the base subsystem itself.

In my call to action, as I'm part of the validation team, one of the things we are constantly struggling with is finding workloads that have cross-architectural support. We have a lot of workloads that run well on x86; when we try to run the same workload on ARM, we don't get the same performance, or the workload simply does not exist. A lot of times, we struggle with finding workloads that give us a sufficient level of configuration. So, if we want to change things like access patterns to HBM or we want to change things like data patterns, it's difficult to find these kinds of workloads.

Another problem that we've been having is standardized logging. So, whenever we do see errors that are generated by these workloads, a lot of these workloads generate errors in different ways that are difficult for our infrastructure to consume. So, having the community help us come up with schemas that standardize the error reporting of workloads will be great.

And also, the last is performance. A lot of times, it's very difficult for us to make performance comparisons across different architectures just because workloads sometimes exist for one architecture that do not exist in another. So, key performance indicators that we can use across different architectures and benchmarks that are cross-architecturally compatible will help immensely in the validation of AI systems.

And that's it. Thank you. Are there any questions? Brief questions? Yes. So, it depends on the timelines we're trying to meet, but we typically have an extended test plan that we execute on our systems that are used for characterization of the architecture itself, and then we also have systems that are dedicated to doing regressions of firmware.

On the systems that are doing extended validation, that can run in the order of weeks to months to do end-to-end testing. And then, on the systems that we're doing firmware regressions, those systems are typically providing us data in the order of weeks. So, we're testing new firmware from a vendor. We typically load it into our firmware regression systems, and then within one week, we can get an answer of, "Hey, the quality of the firmware is good," or, "Here are the errors, and we need to debug."

No. These are not on production servers. These are servers that are specifically for testing. These are specifically dedicated for the purpose of validation. All right. Great. Thank you.
