A Fully Open and Collaborative AI Ecosystem, presented by AMD

Thank you. I am incredibly excited to be here today in this phenomenally fast-moving industry that we live in as AI is just taking off exponentially. My thanks to OCP and this community for your collaboration that's allowing us to move faster and give customers choice. It's just a must in this AI era. I also want to thank George and the OCP leadership for the appointment of Robert Hormuth. He's our CVP of Data Center Architecture and Strategy to the OCP Board of Directors. We've been growing our participation, our contributions in OCP every year, and this will allow us to contribute more. Thank you.

Look, let's jump in. We talk about this explosive growth, and it's just so evident by the numbers. In terms of what we're driving with a $45 billion market in 2023 that's on a pace to be a $500 billion market by 2028, that's an amazing 60% compound growth rate. I've been in the industry for decades, and there's no way that we could have anticipated this kind of growth. It's actually an 80% compounded growth rate when you look at inferencing alone. And when you think about that, you know, it's probably underbid. In fact, our CEO, Lisa Su, said last week, we're probably underestimating the size of this market. Why? It's simple. AI is embedded everywhere. It's across healthcare applications, it's across the manufacturing floor, services, financial applications. I have to look no further than how we are accelerating our chip designs to market at AMD. Every week, I see an astounding new application of AI improving our processes. And that's exactly what AI is doing. It's transforming the entire workflows and the processes, speeding products to market and giving us improved experiences. Large language models have driven a massive growth in this compute demand. The next wave of growth continues, and we think, okay, we clearly see the GPU consumption, but as the number of tokens in the context size explodes, it's driving a growth in CPUs. Beyond that, we're seeing the advent of more specialized accelerators. And when you think about the billions of daily AI interactions that are going on around the globe, it's no surprise. It's going to take a continued acceleration of innovation in this industry, and it's just a huge opportunity, but it comes with challenges. This capability to be able to build out now gigawatt-scale data centers, sovereign AI data centers across the world, enterprise data centers, each have unique requirements, but the capital expenditures are enormous. The demand for performance drives us as an industry to optimize total cost of ownership at the system level for power, for hardware, for software. It's the system optimization that we're all focused on now. Cooling and energy are first-order design parameters, as you already heard in the talks leading up to mine. Open software ensures portability, transparency, long-term flexibility, and that has to be weighed against proprietary stacks. The AI compute demand is so large that it's really going to require continued developments on general-purpose CPUs and GPUs, but also customization. And so these are the kind of things that all of us are looking to address in our industry, and we have to really take on by thinking about the role that open plays.

History teaches us the role that open plays. If you look back over time and you look at the breakthroughs that have shaped our industry, they all share a common foundation: open collaboration. Linux unlocked the modern software era. Open standards—TCP/IP and HTTP in networking, the open web for browser content development. Mobile is an incredibly competitive market thanks to a vibrant set of open platforms and developer application ecosystems. Every wave of computing acceleration has been powered by open ecosystems. They create speed, scale, and innovation that closed systems cannot match. And AI is evolving at a pace that outstrips the previous waves that we've seen prior to this. We're seeing new models at every turn, new frameworks, new approaches to chip design, architecture, and then throughout our system build. Like the prior waves, AI will require open ecosystems to keep pace. And that's the vital role that OCP plays. It's not just the standards that we discuss here in the days of this conference; it's really setting the tone for interoperability and accelerating improved infrastructure through shared collaboration, innovation, and communication.

At AMD, being open isn't a buzzword. It's what we embrace, it's how we design, it's how we architect. And we want to win on the merit of our products versus a lock-in approach. Open means a level playing field, both hardware standards to interconnect unique devices, broad access to the software stack. AMD's open AI stack, ROCm. Open interconnects like UCIe for chiplets, like CXL for expansion, like UALink for scale up, like UEC for scale out. All of these play a role to scale the AI ecosystem aggressively and sustainably going forward. The decisions that we make now about openness, how we apply this, they define the decade ahead. They define if we'll be able to keep up with the insatiable demand for computing.

As I turn to the software aspects of that open ecosystem, we're coming up early next year on our 10th anniversary of the ROCm AI stack. Its heritage: it came out of the heterogeneous system architecture, HSA, where a number of companies came together because we saw that heterogeneous computing was the future. It started with HPC applications and has now been battle-hardened as the ROCm stack is production software for years in the largest supercomputers. We launched in December 2023 the MI300X, a dedicated GPU to advance AI processing, including the math approximations to really accelerate more computation per watt of energy. If you look at 2024, we're so pleased that we had a broad acceptance. We went from virtually nothing to a $5 billion revenue in that first year. And the interaction with those demanding hyperscale customers that we have had, many of them on stage and presenting in this OCP, was invaluable. That hardened the AI stack aspects of ROCm. And what we have done in 2025 is we focused on opening that ROCm stack and creating a vibrant developer ecosystem. We've sped the release of the software, we've added a significant development cloud to ease the access to machines to develop applications, and we've also improved the CI/CD flows and support for the ecosystem. We have partnered on open ecosystems, being a founding member of the PyTorch Foundation, with support for vLLM, SGLang, OpenAI's Triton compiler, that really eases the portability of AI applications. We promised our developers in the second half of 2025 that we would create a developer platform riding on the consumer products that we have: AMD Radeon graphics, gaming cards, AMD Ryzen, millions and millions of PCs. We could not be more pleased that we do now have for both of those platforms the ability to run that ROCm stack, to have that development platform, and you can look at the PyTorch support that's out for preview on both Windows and Linux. So, really pleased to see that lowering the barrier to develop on the open ROCm stack.

When you look at how we think about AI foundation models, it's just amazing to me how quickly we've gone from designing traditional data center systems to truly rack scale. It changes the thing of design. It changes how you solve the problem. No one can work in isolation in their silo. You have to think about the foundation models for AI requiring entire racks and we need clusters of those racks just to be able to run those foundation models as one cohesive system. Since early adoption of AI, what we've seen is roughly a 4x growth in power, a 15x growth in power density, and gigawatt scale of power in the data center. Nowhere is aligned innovation more important than the standards to create those clusters, to create those massive data centers. It's the standards to scale up into AI cluster pods and to scale those pods out into massive clusters.

AMD is committed to standards to give choice for scale up and to strengthen Ethernet to be even better at handling the demands of scale out, with congestion management, packet spraying, and more. AMD was a founding member of the Ultra Ethernet Consortium to address scale-out networking for both HPC and AI. UEC 1.0 is out, it's already shipping. We have our AMD Pensando, which is out and supports this standard.

Let's turn to scale up. AMD was a founding member of UALink to create a path that we can collaborate together as a consortium in terms of scale up. And what we did to speed that development was we donated the battle-hardened Infinity fabric, the key IP that we had used for generations in scaling our CPUs efficiently, our heterogeneous clusters that run in supercomputers. So it's a battle-hardened fabric, and now UALink is off and running with very rapid growth in the industry. We're also excited about what you've heard about already today: a new collaboration in the industry that will really help protocols be run across Ethernet. We're happy to announce that we've also joined ESUN, Ethernet for scale-up networks, and it's going to provide a common abstraction point so that we can all, where needed and where that fits your system design, leverage a common Ethernet, yet provide a variety of transport protocols that run on top. And that's going to result in an even more robust Ethernet ecosystem. And for AMD scale-up implementations, our plan is to offer choice in our future roadmaps. Our native UALink can be optimized for direct GPU to GPU connections, and that's going to come to market as switches supporting UALink with a number of them in development. As well, you can look at the application of running a UALink standard over Ethernet, and that's our initial implementation, which is supported by switch infrastructure today—a great example of the industry coming together to offer choice, and that's what we're going to support in our AMD roadmap.

I can't think of a better example to exemplify what I've been talking about here with open standards than the Helios rack that we announced in June, at our Advancing AI event. As part of our efforts on open, we have adopted Open Rack-Wide. Open Rack-Wide is the next evolution of OCP, aligning us in terms of how we create an infrastructure that we can all participate in. Meta has donated this spec to OCP, and you'll hear more about that tomorrow. And with the help of our ZT design system team, we have created a reference rack, optimizing power, optimizing cooling, optimizing the interconnection across the rack to meet our performance goals. Open standards like OCP's DC-MHS, UALink, and others are supporting this modularity and interoperability of the Helios rack. Let's pull out a tray and just take a look at how many standards are deployed across our implementation. The EPYC CPU, connected peripherals through PCIe 6.0, expansion with CXL, and Instinct to the CPU, or GPU to CPU, again, that Infinity fabric. The Instinct GPU connects to the AI NIC using UALink. The scale up is done with UALink over Ethernet, as I mentioned. The management module is DC-SCM, part of the modular hardware system. So it's amazing to me when you look at how this has really come together to provide state-of-the-art rack optimization, but leveraging open standards to allow an ecosystem across components, networking, and an open software stack.

I want to wrap up just mentioning two quick points that I think have significant impact to the user community. First is confidential computing. As businesses fine-tune their data, they take their data and create a fine-tuned model off of their data that they've been running their businesses on for years, that resulting model, the resulting weights, and the data itself must be safeguarded. And that's where confidential compute comes in. We were a founding member with Caliptra, and we've been supporting confidential compute on our EPYC CPUs for years. But now, with the advent of our fifth gen EPYC, we now support trusted I/O, and that's expanded the trusted boundary to cover peripherals, to cover storage, and of course, accelerators like GPU and specialized devices. OCP attestation is also supported, so both that fifth gen EPYC, as well as our MI400 coming out next year, support OCP attestation. And that's also critical, as you've heard from other speakers, to safeguard and have confidence and trust of our customers running their most precious applications.

Lastly, a brief update on the CPU ecosystem. It was this event last year that we announced the formation of the x86 advisory group. One year later, AMD and Intel, with strong industry collaboration, have met with great success. We've actually, along with our hyperscalers, our OEMs and operating system leaders, we've gotten great input. And what we've done is driven alignment: alignment on interrupt model structures, ISA extensions for both vector and matrix math operations, and new features for memory safety. The recent industry announcements really point to the massive install base of x86 and the health of this ecosystem. Very pleased with the x86 advisory work that will keep this universally accessible for code developers without having bifurcation by vendor.

So I want to wrap up by concluding with a point that I've stated, but you already know. History has shown that open ecosystems win. They drive faster progress, broader adoption, and greater trust. The difference today is speed. AI is moving so quickly that it's probably an order of magnitude the pace of the other inflections we've seen. And so this kind of collaboration isn't just a success factor, it's actually fundamental. From chip through rack, from software to hardware, we have to be openly meeting and collaborating to drive performance, to drive efficiency, to sustainability in this new era. I'll just remind you of an OCP rallying cry: scaling innovation through collaboration. AMD is committed to advancing open. We're committing to collaboration to drive a vibrant, open, and competitive ecosystem. The industry is banking on us to come together. There couldn't be a better venue than OCP for us to show what we can do together. Please come visit us at our AMD booth, check out Helios, and have a great conference. Thank you.
