A Peek Into the Future — Results from PCIe Gen 6 SSD Simulations, presented by Young Pak (FADU)

Okay, welcome to my talk, and thank you all for attending. My name is Young Pak. I'm the VP of Business Development for Fadu. We make SSD controllers. And today I'm here to give you a little bit of a peek into.

To what the future of SSDs look like. And we have some test results that we've got from some PCIe Gen 6 SSD simulations, and I want to go through those. So, we're going to go through a quick agenda, the history of PCIe, quick trends, and what is possible with PCIe Gen 6. There's some associated technologies that are very important. I think you'll see a lot of those in the short flow here today.

And then some predictions on what's going to happen with the next generation of PCIe. So, back when NVMe first got started, and it got started a little over a decade ago, people started using SSE. And they were imposed, they were actually limited by the designs of Satasa. So, Satasa was designed for hard drives, but in order to maintain compatibility with legacy, they stayed with that interface for SSDs. Since then, there's been a real Really rapid evolution in how SSDs have been connecting, the latencies involved, bandwidth, everything has changed very, very quickly.

And there are a set of questions here, I won't go through them all right now, but the main question is: can this trend continue as we go from one generation to the next? What's going to happen if those trends do continue? So, to start with, let's take a look at the history of PCIe in general. When we take a look back from Gen 1 all the way to Gen 6, we see that there's this constant improvement in bandwidth performance. This has gone on for quite a while.

A long time. In order to get this great performance, we have to increase the overall amount of parallelism. We're putting more drives into the servers. There's all sorts of stuff going on. And as we've taken a look, every generation gets harder and harder to meet the requirements for.

So the basic question. That's a lot of people have been asking are is can SSDs keep up with this performance? And uh at some point this is going to break, we're gonna have the the SSD equivalent of Moore's Law, uh but for now let's take a look at you know what what's uh some of the challenges are with these modern SSDs. The biggest problem that I have seen in my decade of working with different storage companies is there's just not enough compute. So when you start adding SSDs into a storage server, you need some amount of compute.

As you add SSDs, you need more and more cores. And the development of more cores just isn't working. In general, we can get about one or two hundred thousand IOPS per core, and the number of those cores isn't high enough for a modern SSD. So, this is one of the big problems that we have. A second problem is something a lot of people don't think about, which is to get higher density, you need To add layers into the NAND, and as you add those layers, the minimum size of an SSD is actually increasing.

So I've spoken to a lot of people, particularly in HPC, they really like two and four-terabyte drives, and we're approaching a time where you can't make two and four-terabyte drives that offer any performance anymore. And so the drives have to constantly be getting bigger. And as you may have seen, they're kind of going the other way now. They've started increasing in size dramatically over the past year. Power, and at this show, you'll see many, many people talking about power.

On SSDs, it's no different. The drives right now are limited to 25 watts. We'll probably be able to increase that a little bit, but we're still running into those problems. And along with power come the thermals. So I've seen some of these server designs, they're now requiring up to 40 of these drives in the front of a 2U server.

At 25 watts, that's That's a kilowatt of power that you're going to have to cool somehow. And if you put these SSDs into a GPU server, which we're seeing increasingly, you're probably going to have to liquid cool them. And liquid cooling of an SSD is different than a GPU or a CPU because SSDs are the one component that still must support. Hot swap. So you have to be able to replace a functioning drive or a non-functioning drive and replace it with a new one while the server is still up.

And that's something you don't have to do with a GPU or a CPU. So as we take a look now, we'll also see that DRAM is also getting to be initiated. With the number of drives that people are putting into these things, the amount of memory that people need is growing by leaps and bounds. As we take a look at some of these simulations, you will find that we're actually able to get pretty close to the limits of what PCIe can do. We believe that we can hit.

6.9 million IOPS on a drive in PCIe Gen 6 that's at 4 kilobyte. And the question has now become, as again, you talk to more and more people, is that sufficient? Is that enough performance for me, or am I going to start looking in other directions for other changes? So, I foresee a time where the standard SSDs that we all know and love today is probably going to split into at least two, maybe three different sects. So, let's go through those one at a time.

And I've put down a whole bunch of different characteristics of the media. So, standard SSDs are the drives that we know and love today. Day. The media type is generally going to be TLC or QLC. The read access size is 4 kilobyte.

That's by design. Everyone designs for 4 kilobyte today. And then there are some other specs. There's a new form of NAND coming called nearline SSDs. And this is where the NAND has actually.

Been designed to be lower cost, it's going to be a lot cheaper, higher capacity, and most importantly, it's actually going to have a lot less cost. So, the dream that people have been having for a long time is: let's try to get NAND to the same cost factor as a hard drive and need. Line flash is going to get us a little bit closer to it. Now, if we take a look, the media type right now is QLC, might get to be beyond that, but one of the critical factors in this is that our page size has increased from 4K to 16 or 32K, might even go higher than that. And that is something that's not.

Easy to get around, so just accept the fact that these are going to increase, and this will allow us to increase the size of the drives up to 256 terabytes in 2026. So this is coming very, very soon. In addition to that, the performance requirements are going down. And this is very important to understand. If the goal for nearline SSDs is to replace hard disks, we have to kind of drop our performance requirements.

And so you're seeing that these numbers are one or two orders of magnitude, maybe even more, slower than a current SSD. And that's to help with the cost. And then finally, we have a new form that is apparently coming pretty soon, and that is NAND as a form of memory. This is generally where we're going to be using SLC to get maximum performance. The read data access type, and this is the most important.

Aspect of this is much, much smaller than normal. So today, SSDs operate at 4 kilobyte. You want to read 512 byte, it will still read 4 kilobyte. And as we take a look at NAND as a memory, we may need to start operating at smaller than that. So that's going to require a change in NAND.

So, as you go talk to the different NAND manufacturers, you're going to find that they're going to have to start developing more than one type of NAND. And we at FADU are trying to take full advantage of that and figure out how are we going to make controllers for each of these different tranches. They're all important, but they all have very Very different requirements. Now, another thing to take a look at is: well, what are the advantages that you get as you take a look at nearline SSDs? Why would somebody actually want to do this?

And I've spoken to many end customers on what's actually important to them. So, in the first column here. Here, let's take a look at what a deployment for one exabyte might be. And these are numbers that I got by taking a look at actual hard drive servers. So there's an exabyte that you need to deploy completely.

How much power does each server need? How much space does it need? Et cetera, et cetera. When you get to the end of it, you need 84 racks to hold one exabyte of data with hard drives at today's standards. That's a total allotment of power of about 700 kilowatts.

That's a fair amount of power. If we try to do the same one exabyte of storage, With today's SSDs going up to 16 terabytes per drive, we actually wind up needing a lot more racks, an order of magnitude more racks. We need 869. And the amount of power needed to allocate for that is well over 7 megawatts. So this is clearly not.

Not a good solution. Nearline SSDs have gone the other direction. So instead of 16 terabytes per drive, we're now looking at upwards of 256, so more than an order of magnitude in higher capacity. And in particular, we only need 14 racks. So, I've spoken to hyperscalers who've told me they spent a lot of time and energy trying to figure out how do I get all these GPUs into my data center.

And they figured out how to do that. And then I said, What are you doing for storage? And they said, We didn't really think about that. We were too worried about the GPUs. Now they're taking a look at hundreds of racks.

And they've said there's no way we can do that, that we're out of room. And so they're taking a look at these near-align SSDs simply to be able to squeeze all of that data into a much smaller space. Now, in addition, if you take a look at the power allotted, instead of 700 kilowatts, we're looking at about 119 kilowatts in. 14 racks, it's a huge savings in power. So these are the things that people are taking into account as they're designing their GPU data centers.

And I'm very excited by this. So we're working with all of our partners to make sure that we can accommodate these. And in addition to the hardware partners, Also, of course, the software partners. You have to make sure that the software will deal with this storage as well. So, the last thing I wanted to go over pretty quickly are: there are new problems, and there are actually a lot of new technologies to deal with the fix.

So, again, if you go out into the floor, different companies. Have different aspects of this. One of the limitations that I pointed out was that the IOPS that you can get from the drive out to the network are limited because of CPU saturation. And one of the major technologies to deal with that is called TCP offload. So the CPU cores are actually being strangled by all.

All the TCP it's got to handle. And if you can offload that, move that over to the NIC, that really frees up a lot of CPU cores. There's also CPU bypass, so you can completely bypass the CPU, send the blocks directly from the SSD out to the NIC and out to the network. So those are both valid technologies, they're used in different ways. Ways.

Bandwidth to the network is limited, and we're now beginning to see the advent of 800-gigabit networking. It's still taking some time to come up with. And I'll be honest, I've taken a look at the price of these cables. They're no longer negligible. I think the pricing that I saw was around $5,000 to $6,000 for a single connection at 800 gigabits.

So this is getting very expensive, but we can still handle very, very high bandwidths. And the cost per space is taking a lot of money. And a lot of that has to do with DRAM. Increase those IU sizes from 4 to 16K. We might have to go up from there.

Talk to your software company about doing that. And then finally, the last two are tightly related, which is the limited power and thermal allocation that you can. Can make onto these racks right now. We've been seeing most enterprises are somewhere between eight and a half to 17 kilowatts, and those limits are slowly going up, but not very quickly. And the amount of space being needed for SSD servers is shrinking, and we need to bring those back up to get high.

Density. So there are a lot of technologies that I've been taking a look at. I've been talking to many, many people about how we allocate power for these systems and how we deal with the thermal limitations once these occur. It's a very exciting time. So if you have the time, please stop by our booth.

We're at B46. My name's Young Pack. I work for FADU, and thank you very much for your time.
