Accelerated AI with P4 DPUs — Next-Level Flexibility, Performance & Scale on AMD AI NICs, presented by Shane Corban (AMD)

Hi folks, my name is Shane Corbyn. I work in the product management team in AMD NTSG. We're responsible for the networking component for scale-out fabrics and that's going to be the focus, scale-out and scale out. Across is going to be the focus of my presentation today. And I'm excited to be here at OCP to talk about how our P4-based DPU AINEC technology enables next-level scalability, performance, and flexibility for AI networking in the data center.

But first, let's talk about our vision. AMD's vision for high-performance AI networking is set. Around addressing the most pressing challenges of scaling AI and HPC workloads. As everybody here is aware, AI workloads are growing at exponential rates. Some site 14 plus X year over year for the last number of years.

Models are growing in complexity and size, and this is driving intense demand on CPU and GPU processing. Capability. But the scaling doesn't stop there. It's key that the network scales alongside these clusters to enable customers to build the most performant infrastructure for AI. And our strategy is focused on three distinct pillars.

One is we at AMD believe in open systems. We've always believed in open systems. AMD is driving the standardization efforts around scale-up networking with Ultra Accelerator Link, along with the rest of the members of the consortium, around scale-out networking with UEC and with OCP, enabling customers to build open, interoperable infrastructure for AI for a very large scale. data centers. The second pillar of our strategy is focused on building the most performance systems with a combination of industry-leading, programmable hardware and tightly coupled software innovation that allows customers to unlock maximum performance from their GPU investments. From a networking standpoint.

And the third key pillar, which has always been a very important aspect of our architecture, is flexibility. Flexibility drives innovation. That flexibility in our architecture is enabled through P4 programmability. We're all well aware of the rate of growth. Rate of change that's happening in AI networking, and it's key.

Our chip enables customers and AMD to react to changes in congestion control protocols, to changes in transport protocols that are happening at a very rapid pace. But first, let's talk about the need for. intelligent endpoints, but just level set on kind of AI networking and categories of AI networking, right? And the differences and distinct differences between the three. There's the scale-up domain. You know, this is a very high bandwidth within the RAC network that's for very large, you know, a unified memory space within the scale-up domain.

For load and store, atomic operations on memory, where GPUs are exchanging wrap huge amounts of memory transactions within the rack across the scale-up domain. The network needs to be very low latency, needs to be is extremely sensitive to packet loss and degradation in performance. And then, as you take those racks, And seek to scale them out, you're dealing with messaging communication, messaging semantics, where you're scaling out these racks across a Rocky V2 network or a UEC RDMA network. My mic okay? Okay, thank you.

UEC RDMA network, but you enable massive amounts of bandwidth across these very, very large GPU clusters. You need to build resiliency in your network architecture and resiliency in your software that can react to congestion efficiently, react to packet loss very efficiently. Effectively and recover quickly. And some of these enhancements that are being architected and driven around UEC also apply to the scale across domain, where you're now taking these data centers and you're scaling the training jobs across sites where you have much longer and larger latency between these sites. you often have inconsistent circuits in terms of bandwidth between these sites and non-uniform bandwidth patterns where you need to intelligently again manage congestion, ensure fairness for all senders in the cross scale across domain and some of the functionality that's been enabled by UEC helps with that as well. Today in market, which we released last April, the Polara 400 gig AINIC is our primary product.

We released the PCIe Gen 5 version of this card in April. We've up to 20 customers in production across cloud, hyperscaler, and neo-clouds today. And I'm excited to announce in conjunction with OCP as we're We have an OCP version 3.0 form factor of this card that we're releasing today. Both of these cards support Rock EV2 and the UEC extensions toward the MA. Both deliver leadership, we believe, performance from a scale-out networking perspective.

P4 programmable and they're truly Ethernet designed for the era of AI with Instinct MI300 GPUs. We're not going at this alone. The open ethos, we're building a broad and large ecosystem around compute vendors and networking vendors where we're working with them on Validated reference designs so customers can deploy our technology with confidence in their AI data centers. Let's talk about what Polara brings. Polara is a single unified platform for front-end and back-end scale-out networking.

It delivers performance. Leadership. So that's Rocky V2 over the competition up to 10% or 10% better performance than the competition. And we'll talk about how we enable that. Massive cluster scale with UEC, up to 20x InfiniBand.

Customers are building clusters of 100,000, 200,000 GPUs on Ethernet. Today, in the industry, and UEC enables massive, massive scale. And the third aspect is: Polara enables you to lower your network cost for your scale-out fabric by supporting features like multi-plane networking. It allows you to radically drive down the cost of your fabric. By 50%.

Now, let's talk about the performance. When we compared our Rocky V2 implementation with the competition, we saw up to a 10% better performance. And I talked about the tightly coupled software between. Our Instinct software, Ricklestack, and our AINIC, and that's how we accelerate Rickle transaction rates on Polaro. We offload the Rickle proxy functions that run on the CPU in P4 and accelerate them in our pipeline.

And this gives us the 10% performance boost. And when we looked at it from a work. perspective and ran a Lama 3.1 model training job. You know, we saw up to 8% faster job completion times through our reduced job completion times through better T flops per second per GPU that we enabled through this. Huge benefits, but when you look at it from a UEC perspective, the enhancements UEC is driving and we're implementing in our software takes that performance to the next level. So when we did a comparison between our implementation on Rocky V2 on Polara, Compared to UEC, we see up to a 25% performance boost.

And we see that because of implementing three kinds of key areas of innovation in our software: adaptive packet spray, which allows the NIC to spray packets of a cue pair across all available uplinks in the fabric. V2, all packets within a Q pair will follow a single path through the network. So, this increases the bisectional bandwidth and the performance you're going to get for a model trading job across the fabric. Now, obviously, when you do this, you're going to have out-of-order delivery on the destination. And we account for that through enabling in-order delivery.

And what we do is keep carry in the packet header the memory address where this data needs to be placed on the destination GPU. So we can quickly and accurately just drop the data into the correct part of memory on the destination GPU. And the third area where we innovated is around congestion control. We're creating this very broad entropy in these fabrics, up to 256 paths that we're spraying packets across. We need to monitor the congestion on those paths.

And when we get congestion signals either from endpoints or from endpoints or the fabric via ECN or trim packets, we can quickly adjust the packets. Packet spray to mark a path as skip and move the next set of packets for that exchange or for that flow on a separate path. So we can quickly react to congestion happening in the fabric. We can also more effectively deal with drops through effective selective retransmission. Packet drops occur in the fabric.

The sender or the receiver can indicate through a selective acknowledgement packet back to the sender, I didn't get these packets, just resend these, as opposed to Rocky V2, where it sends all the packets that are part of that flow via go back in. So, all of this results in higher performance, better model convergence, better. Resiliency from a fabric standpoint with UEC RDMA. Now, reliability is a key theme as well, and these loss happens in network fabrics. We did some comparisons where we induced network loss within the fabric and observed how Rock EV2 performed versus UEC RDA.

RDMA performed. And what we saw was with Rock EV2, we saw a rapid degradation in bandwidth on model training runs. As you increase the rate of drop up to 1%, in some instances, you saw models not converging. But with UEC and the advanced features we're developing, we have up to 50% better performance. When it comes to scenarios where loss is occurring in the network through probe-based packet loss detection and failure recovery, and some of the intelligent packet spray monitoring, congestion monitoring features we've built.

So, huge improvement in resiliency when congestion and drops happen in the factory. With UEC and what we've developed. Now, the last area of innovation I'm going to talk about with respect to our software stack before we talk about our roadmap is multi-plane. And what multi-plane enables you to do is build a fabric for a very large GPU cluster with radically lower number of switching. Units within your fabric.

And it does this by allowing you to break a single 400-gig AI-NIC port across four independent plane fabrics. These planes aren't interconnected via core layer, so effectively you're eliminating a core tier of switches within your infrastructure. But when you do this, but you're delivering the same amount of bandwidth and capacity for the GPU cluster. And when we modeled this for 128,000 GPU cluster, we saw up to 50% lower cost when comparing a big buffer, Jericho 3, Ramon 3 based, three tier FAT 3 design versus a multi-plane architecture with four independent planes based And Tomahawk 5. So radically lower cost, much less platforms to deal with, and better fault isolation, better redundancy with this architecture.

But what's really exciting, and you'll see in the AMD booth, this huge rack, the Helios rack that we announced at Advancing AI. This is a next-gen rack scale architecture for distributed inference and training. It's built leveraging the AMD Epic Venice CPU series, the MI400 GPUs, and the next-generation Volcano adapter 800 gig AI NIC that we're bringing to market in conjunction with Helios, which is released. In the middle of 2026. Now, if you look at Helios from kind of a high-level scale perspective, it's a 72-GPU scale-up domain within the rack, spread across 18 compute trays, 4 MI400 GPUs per tray, interconnected via six scale-out UAL switches.

When it goes to market, it'll be UAL over Ethernet that'll be supported. And the scale-out capacity increases dramatically over our prior product, Polara, per GPU, up to three times 3800 gigs of capacity scale-out bandwidth per GPU with Helios, with Volcano. You can see the trade that. Illustrates it there that goes into the rack. Up to 12 800 gig Volcanos per compute tray for four GPU instances.

Volcano as a chip is built on a three nanometer process. It enables 800 gig network throughput. It's 8x the scale-out bandwidth per GPU than our Polara with MIT. 300 series, which was 400 gig per GPU. It supports UAL and PCIe Gen 6.

It's UEC ready out the gate. And our software, all the software innovation we're building and have built for Polara is forward compatible to Volcano and will be supported when it releases. So, in closing, just one Want to hone in on the value we bring with Polara today with the MI300. This value we expect to extend to Helios and Volcano as well. Up to 25% better performance with UEC RDMA than Rocky V2, 10% improved reliability in terms of cluster uptime, 50% better reliability.

In packet loss scenarios, and up to 50% lower cost with multi-plane, we have modeled in our analysis. And all built around an open ecosystem for AI infrastructure with UAL, UEC, and OCP. And we're only just getting started on this journey, and we're going to continue the rapid pace of innovation. within the networking team at AMD. And thank you all for your time. Happy to take questions at the AMD booth.

Please stop by, we can talk further about it. So thank you all.
