Accelerating Early Stage Exploration with Virtual Prototyping for a Flourishing Multi-Vendor (Chiplet) Ecosystem, presented by Raghu Shankar (Entrepreneur)

Okay. Good afternoon. We have this vision of a flourishing multi-vendor chiplet economy that will solve many use cases in this new AI-driven ecosystem economy. And one key driving force to drive towards that vision is the concept of virtual chippet ecosystems, which is based on well-known frameworks of virtual prototyping tools already available in the industry today. And we should be accelerating the early stage explorations of the chiplet-based systems in this virtual ecosystem.

And many of these might go forward and do the investment decisions and may go forward and build some good products in the chiplet economy. This is a call for participation to broaden up the pool of many vendors that includes the commercial vendors, the chiplet vendors, the research labs, as well as the academia to come together to start developing these virtual chiplet ecosystems. And I will be going. Over the motivation, the why, the benefits of what should be delivered as an industry, and the how, the proposed framework. And all of these things will be discussed as part of a weekly series starting out in November.

And this is a call for participation for that. As means of introduction, My name is Raghu Shankar. I'm an entrepreneur incubating a couple of projects in chip architectures as well as cloud-native architectures. And before this, I was at Dell Technologies in the server product management planning space. I incubated AI at Dell and also was at Intel before that in the chat.

Silicon side, chip architect and validation side. So, as I go through this presentation, the frame of reference is that we are going to this multi-organization, multi-die chiplet ecosystems that solve many use cases. And you can see the on the bottom of the side, you can See the typical silicon development cycle that goes for weeks, like months to years, front-end design and back-end. And this is a call for a shift left to start thinking about or building, defining, and building a multi-organization, multi-diet, chip-led virtual ecosystems that will form the basis for investment decisions. To go forward.

So, going over the motivation of why. So, the use cases: the markets are proliferating, the use cases are proliferating, and AI is driving this economy. But many of the innovations in AI will ripple down to make. Of the segments that are shown out there. On the bottom left, the technologies are exploding.

You've got various combinations of CPUs, GPUs, memory, lots of interconnects that are not being shown out there. And then on the bottom right, there's a lot of custom silicon that's already been developed by many of these companies. Design companies shown out there. Many hyperscalers are building their own custom silicon. So the question is: what's next, right?

And based on the prior slide, this could be four variations of combining HBM and DDR or logic chiplets and RISC-V chiplets. But clearly there will be many, many more combinations. And really the key next step, the key next step would be to say how do we evaluate the technical benefits and the business value to start making some investment decisions that will go on so that we can go and build some products from those evaluations. And if you zoom it out, you're going to have an ecosystem where you're going to have chiplet vendors, IP vendors, EDA tool vendors who are doing the front-end, mid-end, back-end designs, the software design tools, software, hardware design tool vendors, testing tools vendors. System packaging, and so how do we come together to, as an industry, to form this virtual ecosystem is the kind of the call to action out here.

So, going over the why this is important, to as why this is important, what are the challenges? That in an early stage explorations in a virtual ecosystem world, identifying vendors and specific designs in those designs is a big challenge right now. And also, validating the architecture interoperability of these designs is also a very time-consuming process. The third one is it's a very time-intensive process. Process, the process could be highly variable.

Many different companies might be doing it, but they might be going to different paths and the outcomes could be very different. There are a lack of best practices or reference designs. And also, there's not a concept of a well-accepted value. How to define what the value is. Value is created.

And so, if your people are to negotiate, the vendors are to negotiate. How do you define the value? So, we need to have a well-accepted value proposition and also a way to identify the gaps in the offerings. And the bottom is showing the design flow cycle. So, we're talking about the very front end.

And so, the benefits. Is of having this virtual ecosystem, virtual chiplet ecosystem right up front is that we need to have a vendor-neutral framework. And clearly, we'll have EDA vendors and chiplet vendors and chip vendors. And how do we cut across the silos to have start form having those discussions in a more fluid manner? How do you break down the barriers to have the discussions?

Second is to expand the pool, monetize so the chip, the suppliers or the buyers can find good product market fits for their designs. Similarly, suppliers can expand the market. And there can also be through The larger pool. And there could also be a lot of leverage and reuse by trying to find good matches in this ecosystem. Quickly, you kind of do the architecture interoperability, but some of these, if the tests are done, the architecture interoperability tests are done, then this will be a good basis.

And we can fast forward the next set of evaluations. Step four would be kind of the automating and scale, scaling these things. Clearly, these are time consuming. But if you can automate and scale, we can find matches faster and get to time to revenue and time to market faster. Fifth one is about the value proposition.

How do we kind of have a well-accepted Practice of understanding what the value, the technical value, the business value from this evaluation is so that vendors and the parties can have a good discussion, dialogue with each other. Form some good best practices so people who have done it before can do this and more people can adopt this as best practice. It sort of speeds up the development process. Set up some reference designs by use cases. And these reference designs could be a combination of subsystems and some triplets so that it gets a good starting point.

And this may not be production worthy, but could be a good starting point for the next set of designs. And also, the last one is to identify gaps in the. In the ecosystem. So, we are talking about a kind of call to action for the open framework. The open framework is a subset of the virtual larger concept or larger visions of the open chiplet ecosystem.

And for the goals of the open framework, Is to again have a larger pool and well-understood methodologies of validating the chiplets at the system level stage, explore the architecturally interoperable choices with agility and confidence, shift left to all the decisions, shift shift. Left some of the evaluations of business value or technical value at low risk and higher ROI. And lastly, the most important thing is that we want to leverage and build on the tools that are already and the processes already existing today. So we are trying to build a layer on top of that. So this is the proposed framework, and as I mentioned before.

A lot of discussions that we would like to do in the next few months. And at the core of it, the green boxes are where I think something new is being proposed. At the core of it is a collaboration hub, like a multi-organization chiplet collaboration hub. And one, it's kind of a chiplet repository. At a system-level design, like a system C design.

So vendors can come in and put their designs in there. And second, it's the compatibility testing, architecture interoperability testing. So once these chiplets have been validated to each other, it could be in subsystems, then you post it so it becomes a baseline for future. Future references and future shop suppliers and buyers to come and adopt from that, pick up from that database. As you can see, the bottom most layer is based on extracting out from the existing commercial tools, research lab tools, and academia tools.

Chiplet dies and IPs can be extracted. out to a system level and formed into this collaboration hub. And as part of architecture interoperate testing, there are levels of testing that can be done: simulation, FPGA, emulation, and FPGA prototyping, and all of that is well known. Plus, we can tap into a lot of known things like benchmarks, workloads, and hardware software code design. One more couple of interesting paths that we can do out here. If there is already some RTL designs, then there's a way of very later to translate that to system C models that can be dropped into the chiplet hub, chiplet repository.

The other way to look at it is that if there are any system C models, There are some high-level synthesis tools that can be used to generate RTL, mainly for the purpose of evaluating the performance, power, performance area, and cost to figure out the technical value and the business value so some decisions can be made. And so, this is a call for participation. All of these things are posted. on blogs. We have been doing a series of blogs in the last few months. We have a program page.

If you want to if you're interested, contact email is virtual.troto at ocpproject.net. And the open forum meetings will start in on in November 7th and go through till early next year. And we would like to get good participation from the industry and develop something on all of these things, develop something that makes grow the OpenChiplet ecosystem as quickly as possible. Thank you. Thank you.

We have time if we have any fluxes with these one. I'm Janjeet from AMD. So how this OCP giplet uh like overlapping or with the UCIE? Oh, this is at a higher layer. Okay, good question.

I can go to the backup slide. So the way I Way of kind of portraying saying it is that if you look at the four layers that are well known, the bottom most layer, the physical layer, the adapter layer, the protocol layer. So, UCIE comes somewhere in the protocol layer. This proposal is looking at the architecture layer. Right?

So, at the higher layer above UCIE. So, now the interesting thing is. So, UCIE, if you have UCIE or some other interface, and also what version of UCIE you adopt, right? This standard version, advanced version, that'll have some implications on the power, performance, area, bandwidth, latency, and all that, right? So, only the architecture aspects have.

Has to be up-leveled for these virtual prototyping-level discussions, like evaluations. And architecture here means higher-level, like a firmware software, or it's some level of IP as well. Sorry, what's the question again? Sorry? So, architecture here is more like the high level.

Higher level of software firmware? Higher? Yeah, no, no. Higher. Architecture is a higher level of the chiplet and the chiplet subsystems.

Okay, in the SOC package. So think of it as like a processor memory, processor memory complex, and you're doing, let's say, load stores on the processor or load stores. In the memory, and you're looking at cache code and C, and so it's only looking at the architecture layer of the chip lits and surrounding chiplet subsystems. Yeah. Okay.

Correct. Got it. Thank you. Sure, no, good question. Thank you.

Good afternoon. I'm Israel from Altera. Okay. Wanted to understand: like, you know, when you say FPGA prototyping, is it like you know, whole system you are trying to do, the prototyping, or the existing some of the chiplets, and how many chiplets can you? Income and how the EDA flow are there in that.

So, is that the understanding is correct, or something else you have? That's a good question. I work for Altair, I'm an FPGA. No, definitely, it's a good person to get kind of good feedback from. So, the way I'm saying FPGA prototyping, so especially think of this from Chip.

Perspective, right? And there are multiple chiplets, multiple dice, and we want to start doing the architecture interoperability of those chiplets and subsystems. And the slowest one is simulation, obviously. And FPGA prototype emulation is kind of fast, but FPGA prototyping is kind of the fastest and the best well-known, as far as I understand. Now, the way I'm thinking about it, and this is where I think the definition and the work has to be happening, to say that we don't have to validate the entire system.

If you can even validate subsections at a higher speed through prototyping, then that can speed up the confidence and the speeds of the testing. Experience of the confidence to say that, hey, these chiplets can work together. So it doesn't have to be the whole system, it can be subsystems. And how much gets done can also be dependent on the vendors who are depositing or putting their IP into the collaboration hub. So two vendors can come together and say, hey, I'm very interested in.

Of doing a higher level of prototyping, sorry, high level of validation. And prototyping is the best way for me to do that because I'm going to run these kind of workloads or benchmarks, right? And they kind of post it to the repository and then say, hey, you had an extensive testing of these benchmarks using FPGA prototyping. And so now the next person comes and says, hey, this has already been tested. And that's the starting point for the next person to say, I can take this and do my own extra testing and validate the entire subsystem.

So that's how I'm thinking about it. And clearly, if there is any improvements to be made, I would love to hear that. Thank you. Yeah, go ahead. There is there is there are a lot of gar vertical gardens right now, Broadcom, and you know, you can go on, but and they are all doing their own SOCs, their own lots of triplets around out there.

I mean, out there meaning proprietary land. What kind of open academia? Commercial, whatever research lab chiplets or dies that you can think of, maybe ARM or MIPS or other guys, that are out there that can be leveraged to build an open source ecosystem like what you're proposing that can actually. Have an impact because everybody is moving a million miles an hour right now. I don't see the time for people to adopt this kind of virtual framework and do the validation and testing and all those things.

It takes the chip design, just takes too long. Absolutely. That's what you want to speed up that time to market. So, I mean, bring up a good question. This is where I think we are kind of striving.

Striving for this. I mean, I think it clearly pointed out that the big vendors like Broadcom and Marvel are building their own custom silicon. And even the hyperscalers are building their own custom silicon. And a lot of vision in this, at least this track. is to say, hey, can you have three or more or five or more chipnet vendors come together and form some solutions that will solve some real world use cases? And that's a good question, right?

What are the real world use cases? As far as we as we have the question is why would they do that? I mean they already got their own you know everything pipeline. The ones the the markets, no, the the markets that can't be addressed by the large vendors, right, or they don't want to be addressed by the large vendors. So there could be some niche areas in, say, scientific computing that aren't being well addressed because they don't have the, say, example, the sloting 0.64, right?

So a lot of investment right now Is going towards AI. It's a lot of built for AI. But there are a lot of other underserved markets in the space, and what they are is to be kind of determined and to be evaluated. Absolutely. This is not solving that problem.

So we had to find those vertical use cases where maybe a set of companies, not Broadcom and maybe not. Nvidia, right, can set a set of companies can come together and say, you know what, I can get a risk-by chiplet, I can buy a get an HPM or something, and solve a real world. That finding a use case is very critical. Now, once you find a use case, then what, right? Then, how do we work together?

And hopefully, this framework will be the kind of the foundation to start. Building up to that use case. And see, ultimately, it comes to the investment decisions to that use case. So you want to make an investment decision. Should I invest or not?

Is the market big enough? I earn 10K units. Is it big enough for me or not? And the question becomes: okay, if I build a kind of new kind of design with using architecture level, then what is the performance? Power, area, cost, business value that should be invested in it or not.

So that's what I'm trying to bring down that barrier, bring down the friction, so that that can happen. But clearly, we need to find out what the next set of use cases are and kind of and have multiple vendors try to drive towards it. Thank you. No, no, good question. Thank you.

Any other questions? Are we like end of time? End of time? Okay. Thank you.
