AI HPC Lightning Talks

Good morning, everyone. My name is Wang Yixin from Rebellions. Rebellion is an AI chip startup that's focusing on efficient and scalable LM inference. In the next five minutes, I will share our strategic approach to chip design, specifically how we are tackling the ch challenges in AI compute scaling. The demand for AI compute is exploding and now it requires AI service infrastructure at scale. And accordingly, diverse scaling activities happen everywhere, this from silicon to systems. Chip design with more advanced process nodes enables more compute capability in a rectangle-sized die. And package and board design with advanced techniques like multi-charts allows us to integrate the multiple dies in a single package or in a single board. Furthermore, it is various scale-up and scale. Our solutions have been proposed, and the following discussions have happened in many places like OCP. And actually, it has attracted huge attention.

But all of these activities, in fact, require very complicated and sophisticated engineering, just meaning that you need so much time. And huge cost to accomplish the final goal. Hence, as a chip startup to build an AI infrastructure in time, Rebellions established a chip late-based design strategy with collaboration of other companies, which already have the abilities that Rebellions does not have. As shown in the figure in this slide, Rebellions has scaled up this AI compute since 2022. In 2024, we taped out Rebecca Cod, which is Rebellion's MPU having two paraflop scale compute capability. And the chip bringup has started from July 2022. And we saw it work very well. Based on rewreck, our chip and product will expand using the multi-chiblet module technologies as shown in this figure. The key advantage of a triplet-based design is reusability. A well-designed triplet.

It can be used repeatedly for various chip configurations and leads to timely product release without additional costly table process. But of course, the reality is not that simple. Integration of multiple heterogeneous silicon dies requires a lot of considerations both physically and logically. Additional painful verification process in all aspects is also a big huddle. And moreover, the added system complexity requires other testing process, which is also not that simple as well. All the added cost hinders the faster growing of a triplet ecosystem. We believe the key to unlocking the full potential of chiplets is interoperability. Seamless integration hinges on it. Specifically, we need standardized standardization, especially in interface protocol. But it's more than just a protocol. So we also need to consider transactional. Layer.

For instance, intelligent buffering can mitigate the performance bottlenecks between different parts of the system. As I mentioned before, we took a triplet-based design strategy. Diversity chip configuration based on Ruby-coded chimney allows us to rapidly create a portal. Of products tailored to different market needs. For instance, we can combine the four MPU chips with two I/O chips to create a solution optimized for maximum scalability. By integrating CPU triplets, we can build a more general-purpose MPU and for agile. A single label-quad chimney can deliver exceptional performance in a compact form factor. With our amputee chimlet currently in the bring-up and optimization phase, we are on a clear path to bring these innovative solutions to the market soon. Okay, just to conclude, we believe. That this fostering a robust chile ecosystem is a responsibility of our community.

And we'd like to share some points that require the community's attention. For physical interoperability, we need to develop models for early stage verification and testing, as well as explore more flexible. Interconnected solutions. For logical interoperability, we should work towards high-utilization standardized protocols. This includes defining latency-optimized data formats and unified optimized techniques to reduce design overhead and ensure system performance. Ultimately, this online Marking the next level of design flexibility and scalability hinges on our collective commitment to interoperability. At Rebellions, we are dedicated to investing in and collaborating on these robust solutions. Thank you. Thanks very much. I didn't realize the stairs. So just click it. Yeah, okay. Okay. Hi everyone. Uh this is Shrikant from uh the company Rital.

Uh a little bit background is that uh we have extensive experience in uh solar and EV charging station and multiple grid level installations. And uh this is kind of implications the idea like what's going to happen for the entire data center and with increasing Power rack powers. So, yeah. So, if we stick on to the current existing 48-volt power and we find that the actual rack power is increasing to up to one megawatt, and it's going to be very soon, then it's shown here. So, you would require actually three tons of copper just to power one. Megawatt of power. So if you are limiting this voltage, that's kind of a big impact on what's going to be on if you want to install big, large data centers. So as we have seen already from many suppliers right now, or where the OCP is trending, that we move on to high. voltages, DC especially 400 volts and 800 volts and 1000 volts, you can see that brings down the copper UCH drastically.

And it's not only the copper drastically, it also removes the losses. So you are using thinner copper, that means the heat is l heat loss is less, or also means that you need lesser cooling. it's kind of a good idea that we are moving towards a higher voltage. Uh if we ignore the bigger uh part of uh forty eight volts and we just concentrate on uh four hundred to thousand volts, still uh it's a significant dip from four hundred plus and minus two thousand. It's almost fifty percent dip. So that could be an interesting uh way to look at how Uh the whole data center has a big impact on uh cost and efficient way of running uh or setting up a data center. So, uh what would be the best strategy? Uh what kind of voltage would make sense uh to make from grid to chip? So, that would so the best way we could have planned is that to look at the heart of the data center.

That's the servers, and to see the average peaks and average usage of the current. And then the lesser losses would be we push the higher voltage as near or as possible nearer to the server racks, so that would decrease the loss. And also, the best is that the more the lesser the Conversions what we have, the lesser converters in between, that would also decrease the losses. So, this could be our key strategies for a modern data center which could be cost-efficient. And is it technically feasible? Okay, the idea is good, but what is feasibility? Are there technologies available? What could be the risk factors? As you can see, the first risk factor is the arcing. And yeah, so DC at higher voltage has a high risk of failure and high risk of arcing factor. So we need the DC solid state race to cut this off and the conversions, the model.

These are inverters which are already available and used in E V charging and solar, so that you don't need a new inventions for this. And yeah, so there are some standards which is not available in UL and IEC which fix the standards, but there are private collaborations just like OCP who already have set standards and tried this out. Just to conclude, the best way could be to adopt the 1000 volt or plus or minus strategy, and it could be a hybrid between 48 volt and 1000. And yeah, to integrate renewables directly into the grid. So already the solar and others are already working at higher voltage DC of 1000 500 volt. DC. So you don't need to convert it or plan it out. You can directly connect it to the data center. And yeah, so regarding the norms or safety factor, there are associations like OpenDC Alliance in Europe. They have extensive experience in setting up microgrids for the industrial sector. So there's a lot of research.

Already done. It just we can borrow all this information from other industries so that it can be adopted to data centers, and it could be an interesting way to go forward. And we also call for maybe to retrofit maybe a few racks in a row with thousand volts and see how it would have an impact on running. Okay. Thank you. Yeah, it's really great to be here and to talk about how the emerging storage next Paradigm will change the design of future AI infrastructure. So we know that as AI grows, more and more applications will need this random data access at terabyte or petabyte scale. We know that for that, the DRAM is too expensive and SSD is too small. Low. And also, we know like this storage class memory really never panned out. But today, the NVIDIA storage index is changing the game. That by pushing the SSD to improve the random read performance by 10x, and then we can open the door to rethink how the future AI.

Infrastructure will be kind of architected. So, first, like what is the storage next? It's actually very simple. It's a very simple concept. It is started by NVIDIA and to redefine the solid-state drive. It is enabled by two things. It's very simple. One is that we use the GPU instead of CPU to act as the Storage engine to unleash the full potential of a NAT flash memory. And the second, we have a better NAND and the controller that we can improve the random performance of SSD by 10 times. And together, they will like they allow us to use the flash. More like a memory. So, how we can best utilize this kind of a new type of storage device? So, basically, two things. One is that we have to rethink how we can make the algorithm better take advantage of the very high random. At a small block size.

And two, because SSE is much cheaper, so then we should be more willing to waste space if that will make things easier and faster and more efficient. So let me just use two very simple examples to demonstrate what I mean here. First, we know that a program. Nearest neighbor search ANN is one of the cornerstone like tasks in AI infrastructure. It is dominated by the random, like a random access to all the embedding, like embedding vectors. So then we can use this storage next SSD to much better. serve this ANN like by using this very simple example, like a very simple idea, like a two-stage. So first, we do a very high speed scan over we call the reduced resolution vectors, very high speed, leveraging this ultra high else. And then we just pass, we use a full vector to refine. And then we can retain both the speed and accuracy. So here, certainly we need to address those two issues, it is very easy to address.

One is that how to get this reduced vector, and we have a wide variety. Of different options. And two, because the distance calculation becomes approximate, and we need to do distance calibration. And that also can be easily done. Our experiment shows that we can improve the AN search performance by 10 times. same time almost retain the 100% of this and s uh search quality. And second example is a key value store. It's very simple. Like as a future like we can use the storage next SSD to host both index and the data. of the key value store in the s in the on the on the SSD. So then we are not limited by DRAM. So then we can so then like here, like we use a very simple idea from like a cuckoo hashing. Then then we can achieve like actually for the first time, we can enable That fully SSD resident key value store to achieve over 100 million ops per second. And that will fundamentally change many large-scale systems.

So finally, the message is very clear that with the advent of storage next SSD, it is changing the Software contract. So then we have to switch from DRAM-centric to the SSD conscious mindside. And then by fundamentally rethink how we design the caching, placement, and algorithm. So thank you very much. Good morning. Today I'm going to be talking about a new battery capability for dual U.S. Use UPS and dynamic power mitigation. Zync5 is a company. We perform these types of UPS and dynamic power applications for the data center, starting with utility, critical infrastructure like cooling. primary power, UPS backup, power distribution, and in rack or in sidecar DC modular products. So why is dynamic power important? Well first, it's increasing with the number of GPOs. So, nothing good is happening for dynamic power when you use more GPUs.

And because of that, how well you manage dynamic power has a lot to do with what your total AI computational capacity will be. Additionally, traditional energy storage technology. Have shown uneconomic degradation when exposed to dynamic power loads. This and the inability to have good cycle life and also low energy density are problems. Nichols Inc. addresses this. with Zinc V nickel drink Zinc addresses this with good response time, good power density, safety sustainable, well tested and seamless provision of both AI and dynamic power mitigation. This is our test results. We tested at 60 watts per cell, a 28 rate, 50 milliseconds per second, and we had 10 million cycles with a 13% capacity reduction. We experienced minor changes in voltage and efficiency and temperature rise and achieved two Capacity turnovers at a rate that would be approximately 80 times a typical energy storage, lithium energy storage battery.

This is, we've achieved all this with a high operating state of charge. State of health, which assures that we can do both dynamic power and also UPS. So, how are we going to apply this new capability? Well, for cloud service providers, we're going to provide one unit that provides both UPS and all. Dynamic power mitigation instead of having to require two units or more to do that same task. For co-location data centers, we're hoping to upgrade the UPS system for dynamic power mitigation. In addition, we're using pulse power inverters where we inject. The power, that new capability, into the inverter, and it is then injecting into the system AC power for pulse load mitigation where it is needed. And this is critical: close to the source. The closer you are to the source, the less upstream infrastructure needs to be. Be ruggedized for dynamic power. You stop it at the source, right at the IT rack, ideally.

And lastly, for future systems that are multi-mode, AC and DC, we're going to be providing economical, high-performance, centralized. Pulse power and UPS, battery packs. In addition, low cost, direct, high voltage DC, pulse load mitigation. Once again, as close as possible to the source, so that the rest of the data center does not have to experience those pulse loads. Well, this concludes our presentation. I'd like to thank the Future Technology Symposium here for allowing us to help in the process of leading the future of AI. Thank you. Oh, you're there, yeah. All right. Good morning, everybody. I'm Tusharakrishna. I'm a faculty member at Georgia Tech. And this is work we did with Puneet Sharma's team at HP. Puneet is also in the audience in collaboration with Minister. Lanew's team at Harvard. So, what we're trying to build is an infrastructure for testing large-scale machine learning cluster network fabrics.

So, this is kind of a high-level view of an AI cluster. So, network plays a significant role in the performance of distributed ML. And so, here I'm showing a bunch. Nodes with, say, a set of GPUs, CPU, host memory, and then you have the network fabric, which comprises of the NIC, you know, a bunch of switches, as well as links, and like the GPUs essentially do some local computation and then exchange gradients or activations or weights depending on the parallelization strategy in some collection. Communication pattern. So, as a network designer or as a system integrator, there's a lot of questions we would like to answer for designing and optimizing network fabrics. How do network configurations affect the end-to-end performance of an ML workload? How do different Network events affect machine learning workload, especially things like failures. And how do we validate and test the network fabric before we actually deploy it at scale?

So, how do you do this, right? And so, the challenge today is you really have to build the entire GPU cluster with the network fabric in order to do a lot of these studies. And of course, Are a very expensive and prime resource. And studies like this require you to run tests over and over again, right? So that makes it extremely, extremely challenging. Or you could use simulators, but the challenge, of course, is then you get into simulation speeds, fidelity, and there's a lot of proprietary technologies like InfiniBand and Slingshot for which you may not have. You know, high-fidelity simulators that you can just plug in. So, in order to address this, we've been introducing this framework called Gini, which stands for GPUs Eliminated for Network Infrastructure Examination. And the idea of Genie is: it grants the wishes to a network designer or a system integrator with the ability to test out.

A lot of the scenarios that I described earlier. So, the very high-level idea here is we would like to use CPUs to emulate the traffic that real GPUs have. And this project basically integrates several open infrastructures and frameworks that exist. So, fundamentally, this project kind of brings together. Together, like ML Commons Chakra execution traces and the AstroSim simulator. And essentially, you know, I'm going to describe the framework in a very high level. So you have your actual real network infrastructure, your network fabric, connected to CPU servers. There's no GPU in the system. And you essentially have these instances of Gini running. On each CPU. And I'll just very quickly walk you through the process. So you start with the workload graph in the ML Common Structure format. You know, you parse this graph. This is where AstroSim's parser comes in. For compute operations, you basically just sleep.

So this is the compute that would have run on the GPU. The system just sleeps. For communication operations, The collective library in AstraSim essentially breaks this down into send and receive messages, which are then sent down into a library like IB Verbs that will break it down into actual network messages that will then be traversed through the network fabric. And you kind of then send a message back that this is done, and you move on to the next send or receive. Message or the next communication operator. And again, remember, this is the real network fabric. So, from the network's perspective, this is actual GPU traffic running with the bursts, you know, the message sizes, the congestion control, and all of that that you want to test. So, this is an active project. As I said, this was just a snippet to the audience here. We have a poster, a couple of links here.

We're kind of expanding the scope to look at different kinds of optimization scenarios, expanding it to diverse hardware and software stacks, adding the ability to study not just standard collective libraries, but also synthesized collectives. And overall, we want to be able to scale this to study very, very largely. Scale systems and emulate the performance without requiring GPUs. So, thank you, and as I said, we'll be around with more questions.
