Accelerating LLM Serving with Prompt Cache Offloading via CXL

All right, so let's get started. Thank you for joining us. My name is Dal Moon from SK Hynix. I'm working for Memory Systems Research Group, and I have my colleague Taeo Huang, and we're going to be presenting a CXM memory experiment. Use case in the AI domain. And specifically, we accelerated LLM serving system with by 6M memory expansion. A good one, okay. So by now, I think a lot of people are aware of the fact that input sequence length is increasing dramatically, and primarily driven by the adoption of reasoning models and multi-model language models, and also growing popularity of agent applications and multi-turn conversation chatbots, which keeps the the entire history of conversation over a long period of time. So the performance implication of this trend is that as the number of tokens to be processed increases, the amount of compute in T flops also increases proportionally. In the quadratic matter to be exact.

So, this leads to higher time to first token latency and lower overall system throughput given the limited TPU resources. So, to address this challenge, there have been a lot of optimizations introduced. Caching is one of them, which is also known as prefix caching. So, problem caching is based on the observation that across multiple requests, there are shared key or shared prefixes. So, instead of reprocess tokens for those shared prefix, Prefixes over and over again across requests, prompt caching actually stores process result, which is called key-value pairs in memory. And by the time when a request with the match prefix comes in, then those values are loaded from memory into HBM and then processed to generate the result. So, since reading from memory is much faster than recomputation, this leads to lower latency and higher throughput.

So, it turns out prompt caching works pretty well, but as the number of users increases dramatically, just solely relying on GPU memory also. Alone is not sufficient. So people started offloading problem cache to host DRAM, which offers much higher capacity in the degree of a, in the order of a few terabytes. But obviously, this incurs additional latency because now we have to fetch key-value pairs from Host memory to HBM. And as you can see in the graph on the left side, this results in higher TTFT compared to fetching key values directly from HBM. But still, this is way faster than. GPU recomputation. But again, as the number of users increases dramatically, we might need more memory. So our idea is pretty straightforward. So why don't we just improve, well, increase the host memory by 6M memory expansion. So, for those who are not familiar with CXM memory expender, it's basically a memory module attached via PCIe slots.

And as you can place multiple CMS memory expenders through PCIe slots, you can increase host memory proportionately. And with the support, Of CXL switch, you can scale even further. And obviously, since this memory module is attached via PCIe, its latency is a little bit higher than conventional DDRDEM based DRAM, about like 100 nanoseconds to 150 nanoseconds higher latency, but it's way faster than SSD. So, to see whether this latency difference between conventional Dean-based DRAM and CX expander really matters when it comes to LNM serving, specifically for Chrome caching, we conducted a simple experiment. Where we run a single query with varying prefix lengths. And it turns out that whether we store prompt cache in conventional DRAM or in CXL expander, it doesn't really matter. Both scenarios. Result in almost the same TTFT. So, this is very promising because now we don't have to deal with this latency difference in software level.

We can just plug in CXM memory expanders and we're good to go without any software optimization. Okay. So, we're going to do a little bit of To see whether uh uh this latency difference really um uh was that affects the TTFT, uh we conducted a simple uh experiment with a single uh request. And um well Well, I think that's what I just said. So again, we just saw the potential of CXM memory expansion for a single request, but we wanted to expand it to more realistic scenarios where multiple requests are processed in parallel under a more realistic quark per second demand. So We um sorry go left. Yeah, so we set up an environment where we run VLLM and LN cache on GPUs, and we also use the benchmark uh traces, which is called like Cherry GPT and others.

And also we implemented traffic generator with which we can control query per second so that we can basically stress underlying LM serving system with substantially higher query per second to see if that system still meet the Strict time to first token requirement, even under such high QPS. So for now, I think Tao Huang will, I'll hand this over to Tae Huang and he will walk you through the detailed experimental results. Okay, thank you, Dawn. Uh now I'll explain the experiment uh section. Uh I'll skip this. Okay, our first experiment result is time to first token or TTFT. Uh this measures the latency uh uh between when a request is sent and when the first response token is received. Uh In the in the prompt cache, the memory load time is shorter than GPU comp time, as we discussed in the previous section. So average TTFT can be significantly reduced. Uh however uh host memory alone cannot hold the entire working set.

So uh in the first few years, the Uh host memory alone cannot hold the entire working set, so most requests uh result in cache misses. Uh in contrast, expanded memory with CXL uh it can hold the entire working set. So it can improve the cach uh cache ratio from 0% to 76.5%. So, as shown in the bottom right graph, the average TTFT can be reduced by 52%. Our next result is throughput. We define throughput as the number of pre-filled tokens processed per second. Uh in our experiment, we have a lot of different we measure the throughput uh while varying queries per second or QPS. Uh as shown in the bottom right graph, uh the throughput of uh host memory alone uh uh it it saturated it saturated and the TTFT increases. In contrast, the throughput of expanded memory with Uh it keeps increasing uh steadily without hurting the TTFT.

This is because uh host memory alone uh cannot hold the entire working set as uh as we discussed in the previous uh slide. So but if the prompt cache works properly it can save a computing resource. So which is the same thing. Can be used to process more requests. So that means we can increase the throughput. So as a result, the expanded memory with CXL, which can fully benefit from the prompt cache, it can allow the throughput to keep increasing steadily. And we also compare memory with MBMA. SSTs. Uh SSTs have higher latency and lower bandwidth compared to memory. So loading data from SSTs takes longer than memory. So as a result, as shown in the bottom middle graph, the SSDs show a 30% higher TTFT. Because T-F-S-St is a very important thing Is higher, SST can process fewer requests than memory. So, as a result, as shown in the bottom right graph, as QPS increases, the throughput of SST uh saturates earlier than that of memory.

Okay, the experimental section is complete. Now, I hand it back to the Thank you. So to summarize, CXM memory expansion allows for a larger prompt cache, which in turn enable underlying LLM serving system to sustain much higher query per second while still meeting strict time first token latency requirement. So, and this is a very cost-effective solution because now instead of purchasing additional GPUs to increase system throughput, we can just purchase. Much affordable CXM memory expenders and plug them in and get the system throughput as much as we can. So that's basically it, all we have for this presentation. So, for detailed information about all the experiment results, you can visit our project wiki page. Which we can access through this QR code. And if you have any questions and want to collaborate with us, feel free to contact us via emails.

And of course, there are a lot of things that have to be further investigated, including leveraging SSD for key-value cache offloading. But I just leave that in front of you. Future research for now. All right, thank you. Thank you. And we do have a minute or two in case people want to ask a question. The microphone's right there, should be on. Hi, this is a good presentation. I think everyone is clear that using CXL memory reduces latency compared to NVMe. But have you done? TCO analysis, like, okay, uh my C excel memory cost the system, you know, without C excel memory is X. Uh and let's say you have some NVMe already. Now you add C excel memory. So is there some feel for that? Well, currently without any software optimization, uh Offloading to SSD doesn't sustain high throughput. It violates TTFT requirements, like SLO latency. So we need further software optimizations to enable prompt cache offloading to SSD first.

So once that is done, we're going to have to do that. On, we can compare this TCU analysis. But our hypothesis is that we need to meet TTFT anyway, so SSD is not our choice at this moment. But we'll see whether SSD can be enabled for PlumCache offloading. Because, see, all these other NVIDIA and all these presentations. They're just saying, hey, GPU direct to SSD. They don't advertise adding more memory anywhere. So, well, based on the open source available, we tried LA Cache and also with Dynamo as well. The offloading to SSD is not. Not mature yet, as far as I know. Maybe it can be, it is being developed in the NES pretty soon, so we'll try it out later then. Okay, there actually is two minutes left if someone wants a question. Mic is open. Okay, looks like we're done. Thank you very much.
