Accelerating Real World CXL Deployments From Hardware Assisted Intelligent Tiering to Compres

Jongmin Shoi from SK Hynix. I will begin talking about hardware compressed memory and then Jongmin will continue with hardware assisted intelligent hearing. So my name is Dimitriz, I'm from Zero Point Technologies and let's talk.
About compression. So we it has been known for some time through research that one can expect at least a 2x compression ratio for real world workloads, which essentially means that you need half the memory for your data.
If you use compression. And we at zero point we propose that this compressed memory is another memory tier. So we have CXL DRAM, and then after that, we have compressed CXL DRAM. And compression is not something new. Hyperscalers.
Have been doing it for a while in software. So here we saw in the slide that Meta and Google use around 5% and 3% of CPU cycles for software compression. And of course, if you move this compression to a dedicated acceleration,
you'll save these CPU cycles and you can use them to optimize for your service KPIs instead. This is why Meta and Google on the OCP spec for memory expander uh devices require hardware compressed memory as a must-have.
Even before compression, so the work of the OCP group for the TCO model has shown that C Exce gives you an opportunity to save on the total cost of ownership. How does it do that? Well, we see on the on the plot on the top left,
That the cost of DIMMs is non-linear per gigabyte compared to their size. So mid-sized DIMMs, 32 and 64 gigabytes, have lower cost per gigabyte compared to very small or very large DIMS. So you can have a TCO advantage if you use such DIMMs, especially if there is.
Cycled DDR4 DIMS over CXL compared to having directly attached memory to get more gigabytes per thread. Now, what happens if you add compression? So, this table shows an example computation from the that TCO model for
From the OCP working group for TCO. So we see here that if you add C Excel instead of directly attached DRAM, you already already get a a TCO advantage. Here we see twenty percent in this example. If you compress this memory because you you need less memory,
For your data, you get an additional TCO saving. Here is 33% in this example for a 2x compression ratio. So, the question that comes is: can you achieve this compression ratio and at what cost? To answer this, on the right side,
We show some analysis we've done at zero point with our cache line compression algorithm and various real-world workloads, including databases, scientific computation, high-performance computing, and JVM workloads. And we see that on average we get
Get 1.85 compression ratio. So the first answer is: yes, you can achieve such a compression ratio. And the second question is: what is the cost for that? And mainly, what is the cost latency-wise? So, for the same evaluation, and I show the system setup here.
So it's an FPGA evaluation prototype. We measure the read latency either without compression, so plain CXL, and the read latency with our cache line compression algorithm. And what we see here is that for most workloads, the latency impact is very low.
In some cases it even uh improves. And we can achieve that ex especially because we compress one cache line at a time. So the compression block is very small. Uh uh the third question you might ask is what about AI? What can we do for AI workloads? And uh
We actually have um cache line compression algorithms specialized for AI workloads and there we can get compression ratios of about 1.5x for LLMs or 2x for KV cache specifically. And what does this mean compared to the state of the art?
So we have measured the compression here. I showed two LLMs, LAMA and DeepSeek 8B, either with one of our cache line algorithms on blue, and with three standard open algorithms, the three other bars, red, yellow, and green. So we see.
That we get this 1.5x, whereas the other algorithms are quite lower. The second thing I want to note is that, as I said, this is on 64-byte granularity. If you see the other algorithms are at 64 kilobytes, so the latency impact from the other algorithms when you have 64 byte blocks.
Is much higher. So we can get better compression with much lower latency. So, in summary, we have this IP. We have it on an Altera FPGA expander card. It's the complete product and it's ready for evaluations. So, it includes the IP.
also includes uh the tiering infrastructure, kernel changes to make the tiering more efficient, and hardware telemetry. And for ASIC we can integrate with the RAMBAS C Excel uh controller. And you are welcome to see the live demo of this uh Altera based IP on uh
Our booth on the Innovation Village. And with that, I give the floor to Jong Min to talk about hardware-assisted intelligent teering. Thank you. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone. My name is Jean-Min Choi from Eskeanix. Today
I'm gonna talk about our uh recent work on accelerating uh real world uh Shakespeare deployment focusing on hydro assisted uh intelligent uh tiering solution based on Shakespeare hard range uh monitoring unit, actually Sheck CHMU. So you know uh one of the key challenges that uh Shakespeare memory
Typically shows a higher latency and a lower bandwidth than our local DRAM. So, to make this kind of Shakespeare memory practical in real application, we need a more intelligent Turing solution. So, efficiently deciding which data should be stayed in local DMR.
local D RAM and which data can be placed in the Shakespeare memory. So basically this slide shows our motivation for developing that kind of coding solution. So we analyze our memory access pattern based on some workload and benchmark. So
So, that heat map clearly shows that temporal and spatial variations in data hardness. So, some memory regions can be frequently accessed, and the others are cold most of the time. So, a key requirement is to continue.
Continuously track the kind of memory access pattern during workload execution time and dynamically promote some hot page or hot regions from Shakespeare memory to the local DRAM. But you know, existing solution is not ideal for this.
So, for instance, software-based turing such as Auronuma, which use memory page table bit, it is very simple, but it is cold-screen, it means that it is inaccurate. And the other option, for example, CPU-driven tracking methodology, like in
entire PBS and AMD IBS is also fail to fully track whole uh memory traffic and also significantly consume that uh CPU cycles. So we just uh need uh some better uh solution, better approach that achieve both accuracy and efficiency.
So that's why CHMU comes in. And so you know, you know, that CHMU already described in the Shex Spec 3.2, and it can, you know, enable device-driven tracking of memory access pattern, and also it can identify self-hat regions.
Hat memory in Shakespeare Memory device, and you can update hot list with that information. And also that kind of information, that hot list can be eventually used by host to promote that hot page from Shexbel memory to the local.
So, by uploading that kind of tracking mechanism or logic to the device, the HMU can reduce the host side overhead and also it can mitigate Shakespeare-induced latency. So, to evaluate this kind of thing.
Concept, our concept, we have implemented full hardware software prototype for CHMU. So in the device side, we have HMU control logic to, you know, for traffic detection. And then also we have some registers compliant with the
To configure our HMU device. And then also in the software side, we have corner layer control engine and driver to manage our device, as well as some migration engine to move pages between, you know.
60 memory and local DRAM. So overall our HMU prototype provides some highly assisted frame up for real-time page migration. So we have evaluated our HMU-based Turing solution.
On several workloads like DLRM training, inference, and spec CPU and access bench. And we use two kinds of policy allocation policies. So, first one is all pages initially allocated to SheckStream memory. And the second one is the DRAM first policy with one-to-one DRAM and ShackSery.
Split page allocation cases. So we just compared against Auroruma using normalized execution time. So the result was quite promising. So in all test workload, the HMU-based
uh our TRING solution achieves better performance. So it uh it not only reduce the latency but also you know the maintain uh low uh traffic overhead since you know the most trap tracking you know tracking uh logic uh was uploaded from CPU side to the device side.
So overall our uh HMU based TRING solution improves the system performance by you know highly uh hundreds accuracy. All right, so uh to wrap up uh our device driven tracking based on the uh CHMU can provide you know higher
Accuracy and lower tracking overhead for real-time page migration. And also, we plan to extend our work beyond DLRM, so to broader AI, the other AI use cases, such as LRM and GNN. So, through that kind of work,
and uh research, we could confirm that, you know, the strong uh potential of uh CHM new and we believe that it can uh become one of the enablers for you know AI-centric uh shape cell memory uh you know in a real data center uh environment.
Alright, so this is core to action. So in the completion side, we have a checksal device. Actually, the FJ-based expander is already available for evaluation. And RTL is also ready for ASIC integration.
Uh we can uh collaborate uh with application perspective. Right, so that's all I have for this presentation. I think thanks. Thank you.
