Advancing AI Application Development on RISC-V Platforms - Yuning Liang, DeepComputing

Today I'm talking about something um uh RISC-FI or advanced AI or or hardware innovation, whatever around RISC-FI and and to do AI stuff. Uh and I will talk less on the general uh compute and more focus on AIs. So myself My myself is Yining and and I'm a software guy. I'm literally is uh a virtual machine guy putting Java virtual machine onto PowerPC, MIPS and all these uh um and even ARM when it back into lock here. So I'm the founder of Deep Computing. So, and it's founded in COVID. I got nothing better to do. I sold my software startup, and then I started doing hardware because Senjun, I was locked down in Sanjan and Hong Kong, random lockdown. So, I got nothing better to do but electronics. So, and then I still remember. RBI CEO Mark Himo and then tell me, can you do something for RISC-FI and make electronic or whatever using the SOC to whatever when you're in Senge lockdown? You might have a lot of friends there.

So that's the reason. I'm a software guy. I'm serious. If I'm serious about software, so that's why I'm here. Then I'm stupid enough, wasted all my money to make hardware. And I said to James, James, I'm not sure here, James. James, here, we have a conversation. I'm um you know if what we know hardware is so hard four years ago, I I would have not done it. It's so hard, just too hard. So what deep computing does, we we make uh consumer electronics but only using RISC file. So we make the table, we make the smart speaker, we make the router, and most importantly, we make the most expensive RISC-FI laptops. Someone don't know about me. And then the drone and RC car, I remember there's one good old friend. From German saying that they bought two R C cars. So that is what happened twenty twenty three, a four core one point five A G D D R. First one usable, very slow, Tampian, I remember it's Tampian twelve and it's very slow. Oh, sorry.

And then 2024, and we have all the digital support and with a vendor kernel. So, and the story with Canonical is very funny. When I do the laptop, I ask them, can you support this? No, no, no. The sales team telling me, can you give me my million dollars? My million dollars and wait for me. Nine months, and then they'll give you a distro. Say, oh man, I don't have money. But now they are fully supported. They know the importance of this file. I'm so glad, so get all the support from the distro. Except Manjoy. So I think this file junior is really. You know, everybody knows x86 isn't easy anyway. So, back in the old days. So, now they take on internet bomb bubbles. Like Google, they're using x86 ball, PC ball with Linux server. So, they get on it and get onto the server. Then, on the mobile side from Lokia, when I was in Lokia, I in charge of the Java platform for Lokia on the feature phone.

So we have all the ARM chip ARM7, MLI, ARM11s. And the high-end ones, ARM11, not even Cortex at that time. Used to have everything, not relying on anyone from the SOC before they collapse. So, back in my old days, Europe has everything. We have a modem, we have Symbian, we have a S40, S30, whatever. Locky have everything, have the backing. And the lab work, everything. So that's the ARM. They're gone up, you know. But we lose the, we are arrogant, we lose the smartphone, real smartphone. And risk-five, I don't know. Seriously, when I look at the chipset, all the chipset makes money now for the ARM side or the x86 side. Windows and Androids. And how do we going to survive? I think I only talk about AI. Because AI is the most, I would say, the revolution of productivity. So we talk about AI. We're all in AI. So that's why, even though I know RVA23. Is coming, but I still doing RVA20 chips because they have a very strong computer.

So, why I like doing RISC-V because we can't be worse anymore, you know. And x86 is from US. And comes back and driven by US, and it's a very close source. They fight like hell. So I think some of the Chinese companies manage license out from VIA and have all the x86 or OAMD chips, and they're all driven by US. I after I left Xerox and joined Lokia, we helped ARM to growth. I still remember we buy Lokia share, we buy ARM share, because we know how much Lokia giving them. But at that time, I remember ARMS. Market value is one billion only. It's around one pound per share or something. And we see that at that time we can see the hardware ecosystem in license to at that time still have Motorola or TTP Com, whatever. People and TSMC UMC and in the old day predecessor of Global Foundry, Charters and Wecantar, they make CPUs. So ARM dies and IP and Lokia made their own CPU as well.

So we will see that the whole industry for Vertical privately owned to becomes spread owned by the individually by the player in different layers. So IP is ARM and then symbolis cadence gradually grow and then And uh the Fab ma major majority is UMC, TSMC and Charter Semiconductor. So this is very open, become semi-open st uh uh uh industry. And then when we look at RISC-Fi, originally from US, now it's in Europe, it's actually it's Europe, you know. And that's the great thing I think David has done. David Patterson has done moved everything away from the long arm. Probably he knows a lot of things we don't know about U.S. defense. So, and interestingly, all the SOC is driven by Asia. You can say all the SOCs. I do now is all from Asia. So I think they taste the sanction for ZTE or Huawei that they are no longer able to make any ARM SOC new spec ARM V9 or ARM V10, whatever. They started. Embrace open ISA.

So I would say I like about WISC5. My analogy to NINISCA notes be known to anyone who knows it. Right? If you are CPU, then And then I just make a CPU and we have all a lot of open source IP. It's not perfect, but you can make it on your own. And you can put it in FPGA, you can control certain things. So BitLaunch there, we want a lot of companies, a lot of government, regardless. The government is left or right. And the other thing is that I think I said to James and say, no worry, risk file is going to grow. And I see the growth. For me, now my company already passed selling 1000 device stage. Or 10,000. Once we hit 10,000, we are break-even, that becomes a business. Then it's going to go every year, we see the growth. And then we see the performance grow 10 times as well. So that's the interesting thing. And the other interesting thing is that the drill. Is really big.

You know, for all the young kids, you know, I give a lot of talk across the group, go to university, for the young kids. I think risk-fight, good thing to risk five is that you really pay with all the all the famous and good people with a great heart. Are open heart, just like in this kernel, you know, and they will be willing to lead you, help you to grow. And the other dream is that we're on the bottom, this fight, it can't be worse, it's gonna get better, right? That's the complement, I would guess. And that also calls hope. And and is compared to Intel. That's far different, isn't it? One is on the top going down, we're on the bottom going up. So one has hope, one is testware. Desperate. So that is the interesting thing. So we, even though it's hard, but we have hope. Hope let us work even harder. So, and when I read back how I've used three knee tree. Four, but one cannot be mass produced on the main board.

And we see that the RISC-V SOC now, just before AI comes two years ago, before LLM, before ChatGPT, serious idea. RISCFI guy, I have no idea. Where to go in the high-performance SOC, high-margin SOC? What I mean a high-margin IS not any of the closed system, MCU, whatever. It's need an open ecosystems SOC, like anything above $10. So it's a non-market. Okay, that's why all the SOC guy design from the test chip TH1520 is very complex as SOC test chip to Starfight J11 J77110 is very complex SOC with limited manpower. So they because they don't know where mum Go for consumer electron industry, they don't know. So they put all the IP inside. It's very complex. And the second thing is that when this file mostly is done by the startup, and because you don't know the industry and you don't know what Work uh compute power you need.

That's why we have four core, we still have four core, but now we have a another new technology can combine four core, becomes eight core. But they don't know the compute. Everybody's gambling, but for 20 nanometers, okay, it costs you probably uh two million dollars one million. To take well, but the RD cost probably still did 10-20 million. So for a startup, you know, you have limited resource constraint to go. That's why you will see that Star Fi haven't got the next generation of risk-friendly high-end associates. And east wing as well. Because the the government they are not selling well, then it's very difficult to justify the last one. Because everything you double down twelve twenty nanometer, you need five, ten minutes, and then if you do twelve nanometer, you probably need 30 to 50 million, including RD costs across three years. So it's very, and the other thing is lifetime constraint, the nib data time constraint.

You think about it, risk five is 15 years to get RVA23 out. and sci-fi being ten years and that the rest of them are seven years. Even deep computing already get into four years. So we have n a lot from the shareholder investment, we have a lot of uh uh time constraint on us to break even. So So it's lucky that I I see the AI comes help and that's why we say we all time to all in AI, not any other things. But when we look at the AI side, we find out after I've done this chip, Nathan want to talk about it, we don't have a at the moment AI is on the server side is very hot. On the device side, even Qualcomm, AI PC, and even the mobile, they have no idea how to use AI yet. There's no killer application, there's nothing that can dominate our life, we're carrying it. Side is not good enough yet. Because it's been changing from AI1.0 to 2.0, so from the small REST LED transformer now to deep ship, whatever.

And the framework is even worse, probably. CUDA is dominated, that's why you have What, a chilling, about four chillings of market evaluation, and PyTorch as well. So, and once the AI comes out, we have a lot of framework, new framework, NAMA, OLAMA, Whisper, and EVLM as well. So, there's a lot of work on software. So, I find it now when we do hardware. Actually, software is very important. And back to the hardware guy, what we can do is potting, you know. And I think Duet knows it, right? In intense total time, we're potting and potting and potting. Keep potting. So endless. So all the framework. And then The painfow of the SOC, high-end SOC, you know, from IP SOC to bore like us, it's very complex. Software application, you know, their cycle, their chicken and egg cycle. It takes body five to seven years. The East Wing chip I use is P50. P50 is that IP is five to six years old. And now to the ball, now September mass shipping.

Six years. We still haven't got the OS yet. OS yet, but we lucky get Ubuntu's help and give you a render version. I don't know, you know, when I look in the AI, and then I would think that because we don't know so much unknown, we had to make everything a ritual fit. We call it Lego. So it's a new technology. So, from the IP side, and then we have the DAI side, we have IP, and then we have DAI SOC, and then from the SOC outside SOC, we have PCIe hosted device, and then from the board side, look at our framework board, everything's type-C. Then, one good thing you European have done is type C. One body good thing we have done. Because we can't even unite the power park in Europe. But Type C good. So in the product level, later on, I showed that how why fame is going to be good. So, take a look at the Eastwind. I talked about it in Boston as well, but at that time it's not announced. So, you can see two chips.

Now, I'm putting four chips in the mini ITX. So, that's a very festival. We don't know what the market is, and we don't know how much compute. With it, so now we can bundle it. And also, they have a PCIe hose and device. So it can be a car and it can be a motherboard. So we are not allowed to say. And that that is the full call. Focal becomes a call. And then I have A by 4 coming like that. Then connected by uh PCIE bridge. So we made a car, something like that. This is something like that. So this is another AI car. With a lot of compute, and then I I make that as a mini ITS mini ITS member. So it's good fun. In data side, it's my framework motherboard. So I used to do my laptop, it's not giving up. So I partnered with Frameworks. One of the greatest inventions in going backward, we used to Build our, we are old enough to build our PC, but I don't think nowadays the kids build their PC, they buy laptops.

But Europe, I think it needs the DIY solutions. So it's good. So, Ubuntu support us. Now we need to work for RVA23. So next year is everything. 26.04. Once we saw the upstream, you know, Duke and all the kernel guy helped us to get the upstream done. It's going to be 26.04, official from Ubuntu, not from me, not from the SOC guy. And, you know, Grab is a support. After I find out I cannot solve upstream, I ask all these old people who know more than I do. I say, why upstream is so hard? They say it's because it's arm. And recently, Red Hat is moving on as well. So, hopefully, your RVA23 upstream is done. Fedora, CNOS, and then Red Hat, we were all on it. And that's my hope. And that's, I say, right? Because now RISC-FI. It's not high volume. Even my product has to go by retrofit. That's why I stopped doing my laptops because I make motherboard every new motherboard every six months.

If you buy my first generating laptop, I send you a new motherboard. Can't do nothing with it. You can't do nothing with it. But you know, Nina invented a DIY laptop. You can upgrade it, you can upgrade it, you can upgrade the model, you can change it and fix yourself. So, and also we can share board, the share the motherboard 12, 13, 14 inch. 16 inches not sure yet. So, and that would be so great. That means that I can make one ball fit a lot of categories. So, that is helping me. The volume is not going up. I can share the volumes. If I G1, I had to make a mother ball, the NIE. Fee probably kills me already. So that is the RISC-FI. Yeah, we have 604 DDR, we have 50 TOPS AI, it runs. If someone you interested can go to our machine to run the 7B models and 4 fee. 4B, the all run okay. And it's very affordable, right? It's the cheapest one is a wall from 299 onward. It's a muddable itself.

So, and we do have a plan on this low end of 12-inch. So, when we decide that My hesitation is still RVA 23. So, and this is very affordable. We push it down $200. So, hopefully, we get there. And then, this is the AI machine. So, just now I say. That I might put a full AI machine on it with 30 maximum 32 core. Just now it's four chips. And with 2056 LBDDR, people can run one 70B model. And probably even more 120B models of open AIs on the price of $100. So you can take it at home, put it at home, and run all this model yourself and put an agent around it, you know. And if you want, you might be able to do um uh fiber connect onto our PCIE and the night side to connect it to one one the full blong uh uh the full block of deep sheet. So it's very interesting with affordable. I think this is only what one third of the immediate cost.

So, the other thing I might do is that I might do RISC-FI with extendable together with the x86 main ball all together. So, you can carry this 16-inch with two architectures there. One month's windows. The other ones Ninis and RISC-V. Do whatever you like. But it probably had to wait for the volume to pick up so that I can get some money out of it. So still very affordable. So this is the roadmap I see. I've done Q2, released 4 core, Q3. With the eight core, and then Q4, I said to Fabio, there's 32 cores coming with AI. I didn't do loads about it, and we worked very close to the ten stone and just kept the AI card full running on the RISC-FI host. And then definitely, we're planning mini. ITX so that people can have freedom of AI. So, and what I'm going to talk about is that you really need now, I think the hardware we get in there, but the software is so bad. The software is so bad, that's why I come to all the open source summits.

Help you guys to help us. You either give a must request to buy my hardware and tell me what to do. Just like a brew is telling me, I want gigs. I order a hundred machines, will you input gigs? Yes, I will put gigs on it. Right? That's one of the thing. and help me to focus what to fix because there's too many things to fix. Now, for example, Du and and and Andre or or Greg saying that we had to get all sorted out the upstream. So this year let's sort it upstream. I provide all the hardware, I provide all the facilities to to get upstream done. Right. So so use it, feedback and and and contribute. As I said, right, now I'll give you example. Even Chromium doesn't have a RISC-V on their CI and they're not accepting the patch. And Chromium has 20, 200 libraries with ARM assemblies. And no one does nothing about it. And no one affords to do anything about it. So all we have to do is same.

I think Fabio and me know that we need a very good single-core performance. I didn't do 10. Told and understand it. The software is bad. We need very good single-core performance. So she to get the gap. On the high side, the open source community helped us to improve all the 200 libraries. I remember I spoke to the training company. You should talk about. How do we convert the arm assembly to risk fire assembly? And that will help everything. Then, and also because RV23, we have got so much major extensions. Just now we have all the AI doc CPPs need porting onto the new instructions. So we need a lot of software, I would say software bodies, some bodies, some bodies, you know, moving bricks to get it done. And Kernel, Well, so I'm kind of upstreaming. You know, we said that I'm on the virtual team, let's get it done, get it over. We have a proper distro, and then like a scaleway, farewell.

He doesn't need to worry about future OS upgrade. Otherwise, he buys a 10 server. What I'm gonna do. About it, right? If you know Hubstream, who's going to support the upgrade of OS? It's another that in the old day hist history. So we we launched our program. I decided that this twenty twenty three and two thousand six is up us to at least reach. 10,000 users daily on RISC-V. So I create all these programs and with a hundred school universities and all the kids to just same as ARM, you know, back in BBC, remember the BBC mini computers, right? Oh no, I think I back to old day. We need to back on the students. So, and we want at least a thousand new students knowing RISC-VI and joining RISC-VI and helping me to move bricks, solving Bruce's problem, and make the with AI as well, make the gates the Documentation better, porting procedure, training better, right?

And then hopefully get a hundred good ones to support our future risk-fight, you know, a few decades coming. So this is. Our sponsorships. So we have a free course of IP, SOC, Board, Product Design, and we give free course all the materials and BSP, integration, AI integration, everything. And we also give the hardware away to the kids if they do make it. And then that's how we do it. And trying to help the kids hackage all internships, supply train, all our friends here. We get all the kids out. So, and I do appreciate Risfy. It has the brand. I feel that because it's open. So far, I go around open source. Everybody is willing to help, either one way or the other. Either buying my device, give some money, either doing the work for us. And of course, for the kids, especially, I don't know how many kids here. And it seems it's open source summits are getting old. Lot enough kids. So we need to fix that.

And the other thing, we have an open community project, another project probably gives open bow, and we'll OpenBAW will be there, and we have GIS, and then we have app code, and some OpenScan code, all these Camilla projects, and LVM. We're going to have all the sponsorship same. We want a thousand contributors across all the projects. To make for me, it's just giving hardware away. And then, when it gets better, people are gonna buy it, when the software gets better. So, that's how I see it. And then, hopefully, we get all these community projects with very good contributors. Anyone, you guys, free and helping have. On the project. Yeah. It's just a part-time. I think a part-time effort is good enough. And yeah, it's going to be all these devices. And then we do AI because we work across all the research. AI accelerators, especially Tensorance.

We're going to sponsor all the AI startups and use our hardware, help us to improve the whole stack. You know, when I look at currently all the RISC-FI accelerators, they all lack the software capability. For example, PyTorch is not fully ported, and NAMA CPP VLMM is not fully ported, VISPAR is not fully ported, and when we have a matrix instruction, that's not fully automated. So we need those AI guys to do some. About it. And that will be the machines. So we got some of these machines selling out and yeah, same. We will probably give some of the ten stolen Galaxy out. And also, if you're in the cloud, the free token out to do something. So And that is the the the thing um uh I did talk about. And back to what I want to say is the AI side, I think is probably I will see that the only opportunity that we can conquer before uh um Things get better for RISC-V. The only thing might help us.

For as I said just now, for non-AI sector, it's very difficult to compete. We evaluate if we do a 12-nanometer chip. We had to sell one million chips to recover the cost. But if we do six nanometers, we had to sell three million chips. So three million chips, you need to support three million chips effort, the RD effort, all together. probably need 150 million. So it's not a easy uh uh business for the conventional market non-AI. So if AI side you can see just now, if you put a AI mini ITS, I can have 32-core, 4A-core chips in it, and with a lot of compute. And they can be a general desktop, it can be a general industry desktop, but with all the AI in it. That will consume a lot of chips in one-form factors. If we rely on me, Selling laptop in three minutes. I think I can sell a laptop for three minutes. So far, there's no Linux laptop for three minutes from HP, Dell, Lenovos, even on ARM, or even on x86. Right, so that's why.

I say all in AI is very important. We in in compared to my my pre is that this we had to help me to solve not just um let me go back what you guys need to help on on on on is the AI stack. Where is it? The stack is very important. I think the AI stack you need to help is this stack. This is humongous stack. So this year we hopefully we solve the kernel side, right? And then um and then distro side and then d this all on top. I'll give you an example, right? And now I think Red Hat, I don't know whether WalkNet had the six top one kernel. I think open EU lies on six stock six kernel. Six stock six kernel is very old. You need to support all this framework. It's a humongous task to backport. So this this is the the key for our AI to move forward. And then you can see we have opportunity to do something like Chrome, Web GPU, Web MPU, Web Risk File extensions. There's no opportunity on the framework side.

If AI is the only thing left, we definitely need a new bunch of software guys to help us to improve everything from the apps all the way to the framework and to the libraries. And that's all for me today. Thank you. It's not a hardware issue, it's a software issue. Thank you. An uh any questions? Uh do you have a uh uh do you uh have you uh numbers of uh compared to NVIDIA? So what is performance uh in your CPU? I would say that um hands-on hard, hardware is getting there. You look at it install and doing it's 20 spec in. 20 spec in is equivalent M1. But without the software, you're still slow. Right? For example, the browser, you have two hundred library of assembly, vectorized, optimized code. If you don't sort it out, Scala is not gonna give good performance, right? Even though you have a spect in single core performance. But software is still still the key to resolve. And hardware is definitely getting there.

We see the roadmaps, 4 nanometer, 6 nanometer, 12 nanometer, 16 core, 32 core, all coming. It's just people had to help the software. If the software doesn't improve, there's no mass production, there's no mass sales. I that's how I see it. I think scaleway, Fabio can talk about it. Why uh why you wanna risk fight if you can't maintain, right? And the thing is very difficult to compare performance between different GPUs due to software, because software support is so Different, it makes comparing performance and benchmarking very, very difficult. Yes. Because even the the GL Mark or Git bench, because they're all software. The software is bad. The compiler is bad. Right? So far, very interestingly, for LVM, we still haven't got the live-flight comparison. How many paths, optimization paths against ARM or against RISC-FI? I haven't seen the roadmap, I haven't seen the plan. Ready if a compiler doesn't do good, what else can you do good?

Right? Your software is the performance is going to be crap, right? So, any other more questions? You know, Michael is not feeling feeling uh happy about keep doing reverse engineering on the GPU side? to actually get the libraries working and the kernel. So this is happening, and the big corporations are uh doing that. Exactly. If the community is there, it's just slow. I mean, but things uh take the it takes time to figure out, right? Exactly. Just nine me, it took me four years. If I know it's so hard to get the OS on it, I would not would have I just back off. I'm not doing this five. But because I'm stupid enough saying that, hmm, I can get it done too next year. But it's interesting. But we move in there, right? Dude, let's get the upstreaming done. What are you? Hell. Otherwise, we all dead. Anyone else? Anyone else? Then we call it. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
