Advancing Hyperscale AI Fleet Quality Through Standardized Debug, Diagnostics, and RAS

Hi, today we will be discussing about AA fleet quality, what are the challenges, like what are the solutions space we are looking at debug diagnostics and RAS enhancements. And I will cover what are the contributions we are making in this space and also about diagnostics. Jixon will be discussing about debug, and Tanya will be discussing about RAS. Like someone asked. Like a question A, there are three work streams in GPU work stream. There is a RAS: did we drop it or not? Because of how we combine the talks, because of the time limits, there is a split of GPU work stream and merging of CPU work stream. In this talk, we will be talking about. GPU work stream contributions and CPU work stream related to debug diagnostic and RAS. And like first thing, I think previous talk provided what are the benefits for new members. I will just give a quick summary, right. As a hyperscaler, right.

We need to integrate multiple silicon from different vendors, whether it comes from GPUs, like their first party own accelerators, right. You have a CPU, then there is a network cord, there are many devices, right. For this, like we want to seamlessly integrate into each hyperscaler environment. And previously, we used to work each hyperscaler, we used to work with individual silicon vendors. It is a lot of time consuming, and the requirements like Varies and the product and intercepts we need to negotiate separately and all. Lot of work has been done on integrating rather, like innovating what we can do on top of it, right. Once we standardize, adopt this for hyperscalers, like it will provide an opportunity. To innovate on top of the general work we do for integration. For example, like at a scale data we have, we can do predictions, we can get insights, give feedback to the next product.

There are many things we can focus on than standard integration. Suppliers also get the similar benefit, they are all talking to the big hyperscalers and like all the minimum requirements which is required, high-prioritized requirements. They can support on top of that, silicon vendors also can innovate on other areas. Like those are the main things, right. Before I go to the fleet quality challenges, I just want to pick up a scenario. Assume like you are doing a large language model training, right. The training workloads require thousands of GPUs. GPUs, all these GPUs work synchronously to get a model trained. Each training takes like weeks to months. Think through that scenario, right? When you have thousands of GPUs, each GPU. Is trained on a small set of data. The reason I am giving in the context, you will understand the difficulty of what I am trying to solve.

Each GPU works trained on the small data set, but all these GPUs need to be synchronized for their output results to make a Progress, right. People use this white arch and all these frameworks to synchronize the outputs, okay. And at that scale, how does it impact hardware failures? You have seen general-purpose compute, right? The blast radius of general purpose. Compute whether if you see like a memory error, CPU error, right, the blast radius of that error either belongs to like a particular VM or a node level. Whereas, on GPU SKUs with the training, especially the blast radius is huge. Because all the GPU, each GPU results need to be synchronized to make a forward progress. Each node failure can have very big blast radius, and I know there are some techniques like checkpointing and all, those are very costly, each checkpointing takes time, it increases the total. Total overall training time for it.

That is why we want to focus on improving the availability features. How do we reduce the blast radius? How do we get better telemetry to improve the RAS features? Next thing about like Many of you know, getting a GPU capacity is in these days, like there is a lot of competition, and also they are very accelerators, it is very costly, right. Whatever you acquired the capacity, you want to keep all of them into the fleet operational, those are all working for work. Workloads not there for repairs, waiting for root cause. What do we do? Like, what are the rust element it provides? On top of that, you want to do diagnostic improvements, standardize them. That is the second pain point, that is where we focus on the diagnostics. And the next one is a About issue root cause, right. In general purpose compute, you have a single node, now compute has become a rack level, cluster level, right.

And if you see like general rack level, you have compute nodes, lot of interconnects, okay. That rack level, there will be a lot of more failures than you see in a single node. Issue root cause becomes very critical. The SLA to root cause those issues becomes very critical. You need to have like additional crash dumps, debug dumps, and that is where we focus on. On the debug features, the debugging has two levels, right? One you do in the node lab level, the same features may not work at a hyperscale level, like the security requirements, how do we enable those features all different. That is the delta work. In overall, like, Like it requires to support diversity of silicon, you need standardization, OCP is the like platform we are using to interconnect. As I mentioned, like there are two work streams: one is GPU management work stream, okay, and the other one is CPU management, supposed to be supplied.

Talks, but that's why you see the contributors are a little different. As you see, on GPU management work stream, we started this like two plus years back. This is the first effort to standardize GPU RAS requirements. Last year, we published 1.0 version. And uh now we are contributing 1.7 is under steering committee review and uh it will be done by uh this month end. Okay. Their contributors are AMD, Google, Meta, Microsoft, Nvidia. Uh Tanya is going to little bit deep dive into the RAS, what are the delta features. On the CPU side, we started this work stream a like year back, right. We have like all the CPU vendors, AMD, ARM, Intel, and Google, Meta, Microsoft are the hyperscalers. This is Little bit recent work stream, like, but as you see, the progress, we released a 0.5 version which focused on the debug. Okay, like especially CPU debug features across x86 and ARM, there is a lot of variances and all we want to standardize, okay.

lot more depth into type of debug features. And we published a 0.7 version, more focus on the 0.7 version. I will share some details on what are the diagnostic improvements we added into the 0.7 version. Like you saw the scenario, right? When you see the rack scale, like the number of devices, suppliers which go into that rack scale, either accelerator, memory vendors, network, there is many hardware types, right? Each vendor provides a Diagnostics tools, even some vendors have both GPU, CPU, and other memory tools. What we observed is like each vendor across the vendors, there is a lot of variance how they release the tools, and then as a hyperscaler, we need to integrate. And we need to test it, and we need to work with them individually and how to understand. That is one of the biggest pain points.

What kind of physical interfaces they leverage, what APIs they provide, especially on the like I know Microsoft mostly uses Windows, now we are moving to. Lot of work on Linux, like we want to standardize on Linux, all the dependencies vendors can focus. Like, take a particular Linux kernel version. I know Linux also multiple distributions, but as you focus on the kernel and test those, okay, and that is where we are focusing on like how. Do we package all the things into one thing? We will talk a little more details about the diagnostic recipe. Like generally, when you provide the diagnostics, generally, like you provide a documentation, you run this tool this way, it is all manual techniques and also. Sometimes, like when we see the fleet issue, we reach out to the vendors, they say, Oh, run this way. This is the different recipe you need to do. Maybe the optimized for link errors and all that, right?

But, like, that is the other problem we have. And last one is about repair actions, is mostly focus. I would say is on what are the two layers, what are the silicon is observing rather thinking about a data center technician, right? With the complexity, like you see, liquid cooling and all that, how do we replace the one part is very hard now with the complexity. Complexity, right? You need to think through repair actions in the point of service technician or like firmware updates. You need to show the results into action-oriented, not on what you are observing. And for this, like, We spent some time, even though it is part of CPU, like we made this requirements in generic, which can be applied for CPUs, accelerators, PCI devices. Like we use that platform as a CPU work stream to publish the spec, but we are going to level. This across all other components, right. And the second thing is about the tools requirement, right?

We want the same tools to work in manufacturing, development phase, and production. Like that is the other problem we observed: you get some tools or risk. Are different, and we want to standardize across the node life cycle. And if you see in this picture, right, when you we put in a five steps are the main pain points. One is when you develop the tools, other one is when you test it, the tools, third is like integration. When you integrate into hyperscaler or enterprise environment, right, and when you execute it, what problems we face, then when you are taking actions. These are the major areas for the tools. Like we are providing the requirements across what kind. Of environment, like all hyperscalers are recommending suppliers to develop the tools and dependencies, let's say, like you need some special additional code through driver form or something, they put those into a package, right.

advantage is like hyperscalers used to both they used to test this one. Now with the standardization because all are saying similar things, a lot of work suppliers can go and test that against those requirements, then we can easily integrate and we can leverage, we do not need to do Duplicate that effort testing by supplier, testing by hyperscaler, because of standardization, right? They can share the results, we do minimum test, right? That will help us save on resources. Next thing is integration becomes easy and on execution, especially when you see errors with link problems and all like. whenever we reach out to different suppliers. So oh link, you need to run different tool. The recipe is different. Go change the firm somewhere, firmware settings. Like there is a lot of knowledge is shared across meetings, requirements. That's why like Rajat provided a talk this morning. How do we do recipe generation by tool, right?

There is an open source contribution coming up, like you can use the tool to generate the recipes, optimize it. Next thing about action, we want to focus on what can be done as a repair, then looking at silicon point of view. Those silicon point of view results, you can Can get it from, like, say, RAS telemetry, what logs, and all, right? There is a lot of requirements specified in hardware fault management work stream. Those are the things. I will give it to Jixon to cover debug. From a debug perspective, we have an industry state situation where we have tool fragmentation, as Rama was talking about. The tool sets that comes from each supplier is different and the solutions that they give are also very custom because they allow us to kind of debug in a certain way. And there are gaps in features between generations of a given supplier. So, this is where we are today.

Where we would like to go is where we would like to have a general debug workflow where we are monitoring the failures happen, and then in case. Where we need additional information, we then configure and collect further information. So, where we really would like to be is in the collection stand, where failures happen, we are collecting the logs, and then we act on them. So, the common collection mechanism that we would like to hit would be crash terms, where when a CPU or a machine fails, We have the crash term. The crash term gives us very clear action signals, and then we act on them. Now, that's going to be the predominant part of how we work, but in rare cases where a small subset of the failures, we would need additional information so that we could debug further. Now, normally, this happens during NPI phase.

Where you're in the development cycle, but many a times after your production, you do have to go into some kind of debug cycle. So we would like to have that capability also available. And this debug cycle mainly requires additional information, which crash dumps normally don't provide, which could be extended register dumps or trace dumps. It could also be a state machine of how the machine is. So, state dumps or scan dumps. We'll talk more into how these differ. So, in a crash dump scenario, what you have is a fatal error that happens in a GPU or a CPU or a switch, link, et cetera. And this causes the crash. That becomes a trigger event. And based on the trigger event, you then go collect the time of the failure. And based on the failure that you see, you then ascertain whether it is a normal failure or it's a failure that kind of has to have an action upon. And in some cases, you probably need. An analysis tool.

So, some of them are pretty straightforward. You know, hey, if I see this dump, if I see this signal, this is what I need to do. But in many cases, you will need a parser or an analyzer, as we call them, where the crash dump is then analyzed by the supplier-provided analysis tool, which then allows us to take the RAS action and can. Of indicates what should be the next step that we should do. And in certain cases, we would need assistance from the vendor when the crash nump analysis probably needs further information, but that's kind of the more detailed part of it. So this whole flow happens automatically, and it is a collection that happens on fatal failures. And it happens on demand. Now, the requirements are: obviously, we don't have any customer data here. It has to be persistent across a reset because a crash term does cost the machine to reset.

And then you want to make sure that this is usable across not just the current product, but it's kind of standardized so you can use it. Across the development phase and in production and across multiple generations. CPR is a format that we are all familiar with through the OCP efforts from the fault management work stream, and that's what we want to align with. From a debug perspective, now we are kind of going into that exceptional failure mode, right, where this is a smaller size. Subset of failures that we see where we want to collect the additional information. This would require configuring or unlocking the system in some cases, glass break as we call it. This happens on demand, and the requirements for that would be having scan dumps, trace dumps, or additional state machine dumps. Taken, we would like this, this would be in the SIPA format, and it would use the same software interface as the crash drum.

So between these two, the functional mode would be the same. It's just that there is additional data that is provided, which allows us to do the debug. And we would like to have this in production so it kind of makes debug at scale. Pretty useful and easier to consume. With this, I'll let um Tanya talk about the GPU RAS part. Siddhika, GPU RAS architect from AMD. So, my colleagues here talked about standardization efforts on diagnostics and debug, crash, and debug dump. I'm going to focus on the GPU RAS requirement standardization. CPU RAS has been covered in other Section, so I'm not going to focus on that part. It will be just the GPU side of things. So, from GPU RAS point of view, we have published our version 1.0 spec last year, September. The focus has been on RAS metrics. And what should be the targets around them? So essentially, the main point here is: given the AI era, we have now new kinds of workloads.

We have training, we have inferencing, they can be run concurrently on multiple GPUs. So things are different. So the traditional RAS metrics would not just be applicable. As is in this new AI domain. So, what we looked at is, with the concurrency thing in mind, how do we tweak the RAS metrics and what would be the more applicable ones? We also looked at fault handling requirements for system, PCIe. GPU and so on. Since then, we have been meeting every Friday talking about how we can make further progress and the existing requirements that we have come up with in version 1.0. We have discussed further and made some tweaks and updates based on the feedbacks. We also have looked at expanded system and component level crash and debug dump that Jigson just covered. And lastly, we have looked at the error analysis tool requirement, which is what I'm going to talk mostly about. All right, so before I Head into that.

Let me just quickly touch on what is our next version scope. So, we are going to look at blast radius reduction. Brahma has talked about how, in the training and inferencing world, how the impact can be much bigger and how we want to be able. To use our cluster more efficiently, so we will focus on that. We will also look at confidential compute and RAS, how do, what should be the requirements, keeping both of them in mind. And last but not least, we want alignments with other hardware fault management domains. RAS API. So we had a talk this morning on RAS API, which should be the RAS interface, how the error collection should look like, how the actions should be looking like in the fleet. We want those to be part of the GPU RAS workstream as well, so that they are working together seamlessly. All right, so with that, Let's look into the error analysis tool requirement. So, OCP is all about standardization.

It should be helpful for both vendors as well as the CSPs. So, how does the error analysis tool would help us? Here in this diagram, we are just showing a typical error analysis infrastructure. The error analysis tool itself, the green box in this diagram, that should come from the vendor. So the idea is we want all the error information. routed to the vendor and vendor would output some information. So the standardization part here would we are looking at it from two different points. What is the input going into the tool and what's the output coming out of the tool and how can we standardize those, right? So, CIPR, we have been talking about CIPR for a long time. That's a standard defined by UFI, CPR Common Platform Error Records. So, as you know, in the CSP fleet, we can have a lot of different vendors, and each vendor would have their own error record. Logging infrastructure.

So we want all those error information captured in C per format. The C per error record would be routed into the vendor tool. So to be able to route those information to the right vendor tool, we will parse the error information that Will be routed to the right vendor. That's where the green box here. Now, the other point here is: as we have been saying, debug dump, crash dump, all those should be in C per format, right? So here, what we want is all kinds of errors. Correctable, non-fatal, fatal, crash, debug. Everything should be in CPAR format, and everything should be going through the same plumbing, same software interface. In some cases, to do the root cause analysis, history is helpful, and that's where if you see. See the other blue box there, previous seepers. So that's essentially the history of the from that vendor you would want to feed into the error analysis tool.

That then the error analysis tool will take the current seeper as well as the history and then would do an analysis and Come up with some recommendations. So, what sort of recommendations are we looking for? It could be simple through replacement. It could be, hey, you need a firmware update. It could be that, hey, this is a debug dump. Debug dump analysis is supposed to be done by the vendor. So, contact your vendor so that the information is being. Sent to the vendor. Now, when the tool has done the analysis, how is the output supposed to look like? So, the first piece is the JSON output. JSON output is supposed to be human-readable as well as machine-parsable, so that the actions are, we are, the CRC is. CSPs are able to take the right action based on the output. So that's what it's showing on the right-hand side: further analysis, dashboarding, CSPs can do, whatnot.

The other output that's showing in the bottom, CPADs, common platform action descriptors. So this is another output that has been discussed in hardware hardware fault management forum. In this morning's talk also, they touched a little bit on this. So the CPADs, it will go through the CSP policies. The idea is it can directly go to the OS or to the BMC to take the action, or it can also say manual intervention or send to the vendor and whatnot. For the CPAD route, we are relying on the hardware fault management work stream. So as I said, our next version, our focus will be combining RAS API, how it will all look like. So, in the next version, we will have the complete picture here. So, with that, call to action. So, as Rama mentioned, for GPU RAS spec, we have version 1.7. For the CPU, it's 0.7. Please take a look at it. Please provide feedback. Any questions and any updates are welcome. And welcome to join our group.

We have the mailing list and the group discussion. So, with that, we are ready for any question. All right, let's thank our speakers. We probably have time for one question. So if you have a question, go to the mic and ask. We are self-explanatory. No question. Hey, thanks for the wonderful update. My question is on GPUs, right? And especially the last year or so, we have seen the GPUs have grown out of the box into more into a scale-up networking, right, where it's a rack-like. Or multiple racks where the GPUs are connected over a coherent network, right? Either BESIN or whatever the appropriate protocols. I think the single biggest issues that we see is rack-level failures here, right, on the scale of networking. I would like to see how more. Away from a node into more of a rack-level RAS, right? How does this OCP forum look into it? Yeah, like there are a few discussions happened.

That's where we're talking about cluster level, how do we like blast radius? And that is the nest version of the thing. And current version, like talks about link errors. For example, when you go at scaling at the rack level, either you use different proprietary protocols or things. Those things are covered, but nest version, like you Called out like that is a very first thing we want to tackle that. That's the single biggest pain point. So I think it'll be good to see more standards. Prioritize on that. Thank you. We will prioritize that and release it. Maybe 1.9. Don't wait for 2.0. Thank you. I think we don't have time. So questions, if you can take it offline. Once again, thanks. Yeah, thank you. Thank you.
