Advancing PLDM: Structured Sensors, Scalable Modeling, and the Server Host SoC PLDM Specification

All right, good afternoon. My name is Justin King. I'm with AMD. With me is Samara El-Haj Mahmood with ARM, and we're here to talk about advancements in PLDM Type 2. We just heard about PLDM firmware update, but we're here to talk more.
About sensors and effectors and the monitoring and control spec, as well as how to build a server host SOC model out of that. So, getting into this standard disclaimer slide, this is almost completely work in progress.
Subject to change. For additional information, see the DMTF website. Come participate in PMCI meetings if you want more information or to get involved. So, for the purposes of this presentation, I'm going to start with the PLDM for host SOC motivation.
Sort of where we want to go. And we're going to talk through some of the road bumps that we've hid in the way and how we are solving those with new advancements in PLDM Type 2. Things like scalable sensors and effectors, scalable entity association, structured attributes, and then putting it all together for a coherent SOC model.
As Samar and I started talking about this over a year ago, we sort of realized that multiple host SOC vendors are all converging on PLDM as a standard out-of-band management protocol for their host SOC.
For their CPUs. But as we talked and as we read literature available in the industry, we realized that a lot of the implementations between those different vendors were differing by quite a bit, actually. And so our goal was.
Was to build a DMTF informational document, a white paper that gives guidance on how to build a PLDM model for host SOCs. The PMCI workgroup within DMTF has already published three of these white papers, one for PLDM NIC modeling, which is then referenced in, for example, the OCP-NIC spec.
a PLDM accelerator moda modeling, the PLDM CXL memory modeling specs. The the these um informational documents, informational spec white papers are already available on the uh DMTF website. We wanted to build uh a similar one for uh host SOCs for for for CPUs.
But as we got into the details of how we would build that, we realized that modern SOCs have a very large number of replicated components, in particular CPU cores. There are CPUs out in the market already that have 256 processor cores.
And so if you wanted to, for example, do a thermal measurement and a power measurement on each one of those those processor cores, um that represents five hundred and twelve numeric sensors. Each of those sensors is nearly identical to the ones in the other adjacent cores on on the same CPU.
But just has a couple of minor tweaks. To represent a sensor or an effector in PLDM type 2, we use what's called a platform data record, a PDR. And so representing all 512 of these also requires transfer of 51.
512 nearly identical PDRs from the device to the management controller at the startup of the PLDM control. And so the approach we've taken to solving this approach of scaling, solving this large number of
Records is to essentially clone a base PDR. So if you have a single power sensor for the first core on your CPU, you can take that power sensor and clone it 511 times rather than defining each.
Individual copy. Each clone has its own sensor ID or effector ID, its own instance, but it refers to the same entity type, for example. So they would all refer to a processor core, they would all refer to some other entity type.
We're also looking at using this to reduce the number of calls required in PLDM to do things like set set sensor set sensor enable, allow a single call, enable all of those sensors at once rather than having to make 512 calls to get your sensors set up.
So this chart may be a little bit hard to read, but these slides will be available and the spec should be out hopefully reasonably soon. Defining the PLDM clone PDR. This would be a new type of PDR that's not available in PLDM today.
but um would be coming out in uh DSP two forty eight uh version one dot four. The um the essence of the clone PDR is that it points at a base PDR, something like a sensor PDR, an effector PDR, and it says, Okay, take that and make
some number of clones of it. But in each of those clones there's a small number of tweaks to make. And those those would be the the sensor effector ID, we we called it a clone ID, the the instance number, and the um the container ID. So you could you could contain this across uh multiple different containers.
How this ends up working out is in certain scalable situations, we can massively reduce the number of PDRs that are required to represent a host SOC. My example on the left is how you may have to represent the example I gave earlier.
With 248 as it exists today. Again, defining 512 sensor PDRs and an an additional entity con um entity association PDR. Um that that's 513 PDRs with with our cloning, we can
We can get that down to five PDRs. So essentially a 99% reduction in the number of PDRs that need to be transferred while still conveying the same amount of information. Now, looking at this picture, we thought, well, we can take this further. The piece we haven't tweaked yet is the N.
Entity Association PDR. That piece still has a lot of repetitive information in it. The entity association PDRs, of course, refer to the children that are in a container and a massive amount of those PDRs in the container.
Cases of replication with things like large numbers of processor cores, that's duplicate information. So if you were to take a max-sized entity association PDR as is defined in the spec today, it's 1556 bytes, over a thousand of those bytes would be, you know.
Duplicate information that you could have learned earlier in the Entity Association PDR. And so we have also proposed and are hopefully bringing out in the next version of 248 new options on the scalable, on the entity association.
Association PDR, we have scalable physical and logical containment that will let us define repeated lists or singleton lists of identical entities rather than having to list out each entity individually. This lets us massively shrink the
The number of PDRs required. So I'm going to hand it off to Samer here for the next piece. Thanks, Justin. All right, so another improvement that we have been working on for PLDM type 2 is the
To have or solving the problem of not being able to group PLDM data in an atomic way, which is not possible today with PLDM type 2. You can have sensors, effectors up to 64-bit, but what if you want to group?
Group data that does not fit in a 64-bit value along with another pair of data and have to send them together. Very classical example that led us to this path is if we want to send UEFI boot progress codes that are in a standardized form.
Format. So these are standardized in the UFI specification. You have 64-bit for the status code type and the value combined together in a special format that's again industry standard, along with 32-bit for the instance number. So that's a 64-bit PLDM numeric sensor and the 32-bit
PLDM numeric sensor, you send these individually, and now we lose the atomicity between those two values. There are other examples: Ver32, UUID being 16 bytes. And we filled that, creating a larger numeric sensor.
Sensor like 128-bit numeric sensor does not necessarily solve the problem, does not have as much utility as the structured sensors that we came up with. So, structured sensor is a new PLDM type along with a new type.
In the PDR, new methods for reading a structured sensor. The structure type describes the data, so think of it like a struct of different fields, and we'll have an example in the next slide. And as long as
And those structures can be standardized. And as long as your management controller that is reading those structures understands the format, it's able to decode the fields within that structure. Now, this is not mandatory. So if you have a
Device that doesn't have the need for structured sensors. It can still work perfectly today with numeric sensors and state set sensors and effectors. And the nice thing about this is what Justin was referring to earlier as cloning and the ability to scale the number of structures. Well, this is the number of sensors.
Following that same format. It's a new PLDM type, but it also can be cloned for scalability. So here's an example to walk through. So this is the UEFI boot progress code represented as a structured attribute PDR. So of course you have header, standard header.
Header for PLDM for PDRs. The most important feat is that you need to give some kind of an ID to allow distinguishing the different types. So in this example, here we are using ID one.
As the boot status code, the UFI boot progress code. You can see that there is a range carved for OEM structs, so ID F thousand to FFFF. So you can have some OEM extensibility of structures that are not defined in the standard. Within every structure,
So, you have the ID to identify the structure, then you have the number of fields inside that structure. My UEFI boot progress code here has three fields: a status code type, which is 32-bit, a status code value, that's another 32-bit, and an instance ID, which is 32-bit. And again, this mirrors exactly.
Exactly what the UFI standard defined. So we list the number of fields in a structure. So the number of fields would be three. There is a versioning that allows us some compatibility in case the structure format changes over time. So there is a version field.
And then for each field, we need to be able to describe if this is a UN32, UN16, or side N16. So, what we did is we created an enum for the PLDM standard types that are defined in DSP0240. So, one is for unsigned 8, for example, and two is for.
8, 5 in my case is for unsigned 32. So if you see in the binary values all the way to the bottom left of the slide, for each one of my fields, it has the type 5 and then the field ID. The field ID 123, so you can identify the mapping between those IDs.
And this and a C struct, for example, if you are decoding that structure. So very useful. We are already defining several standard structures using this format and expect this to be available along with the other improvements in PLDM. So we talked about scalable cloning.
Structured now, putting it back together to the original problem statement that Justin started with, right? We're trying to solve the modeling of modern server SOCs using PLDM. We define these new technologies, improvements to PLDM to help solve that problem.
Now that we have these tools in our toolbox, we can use them to finish the original problem statement, which is this white paper that can describe a base set of sensors that should be common across the industry to describe a server SOC. Of course, implementations can add on top of that.
that base set. That's not going to be comprehensive to describe every p possible SOC out there. So we came up with a minimum set of common elements that we'll try to focus on in the first iteration of this white paper.
You have basic SOC sensor collection for temperature, power, boot status. You have per-core frequency utilization that could use the scalable clone PDR. You have per-memory controller. So now you could describe power.
Utilization, health, and IO, things like network and potentially PCIe. The exact details of what will make it into the white paper will be as we proceed closer to having a draft of that specification available for public preview or when you join DMT.
And help us in shaping this specification. So, how do you get involved? Now that you know this work is coming, this is all in the PMCI working group. There were a lot of redfish talks today, but this is PLDM Type 5 firmware update, PLDM type 2. These are in the PMCI.
MCI working group. 6 a.m. calls on Tuesday. Very much appreciate the team that has been working so hard on making these technologies available. So thank you for everyone who has been instrumental in getting this work started.
Progressing. For today's for this particular presentation, special thanks to Patrick Scholler from Intel and Dave Rudy from Oracle. They have done a lot of work on the technologies that you see in these slides that Justin and I have the
Privilege to present, but it's a teamwork of many that helped shape it. So thank you. And that's what we have today. And are there any questions?
