Advancing Timing Resilience in Edge to Core Systems From White Rabbit to PCIe

My name is Ulas. Thank you, OCP TAP team, by putting the seemingly unrelated topics together, and we will try justice to that. I will talk about some of the requirements on stability and phase notes. On data center synchronization, and Greg later on will talk about synchronization within the end point. Discussion so far was about the hierarchical model. I want to go back there to say that very likely our objective is to say that. That the end points need to be within some synchronization. It's already within some synchronization with the NTP or PTP, but then we start to define the meaning of the word precise, how precise we want them to be. And that's where we talk about: do we need? Something more when we distribute the time into, say, a radio network. We might want to be more precise because now we have some air interface requirements that come in. Then we talk about the AI data center requirements. We had some discussions earlier.

On some number of nanoseconds that we wanted to have. So, if you look at from the distribution perspective, we can think about the two or more layers of switches that brings the synchronization from a Grand Master or a similar equipment all the way into the endpoint. Again, I'm Reusing some of the telecom words here, but maybe we can replace it later on. So far, we cannot see a lot of defined hierarchical models. I will come to a model later on, but I am trying to adopt some of the terms from the telecom word and try to put it here. We will have the grand master equivalent somewhere in the upper layer. Distribution, as you have seen earlier, happens through either transparent or boundary clocks and the inclines. So I am primarily going to talk about the clocks that are on the distribution. And Grandmaster, and Greg will talk about the end client clocks.

If we see those links, we can see that some of those links are still free-running links. If you are running a transparent clock, you do not need to have entire nodes synchronized to the Central point. So, we can start to see that some of these free-running interfaces are moving from the generic oscillator-based or generic XO-based interfaces that have very loose stability, say maybe from 20 to 50 to 100 ppm, all the way down to maybe 0.5. 1 to 1 ppm. They are also looking at absolute accuracies of smaller, say, 5 ppm in 10 years. The drive of this is probably from having, say, to have reduced loading on the frequency correction that needs to happen on the Nix. So, the DSP load is reduced significantly. We can assume that there is a major power saving that happens because we are reducing the DSP load by reducing the accuracies that are needed on both ends. We could also see in any technology, we can have, say, device.

Devices having dips or microgems. So, having moving to a TCXO-based technology, we can avoid such intermediate disruptions that could happen on the link that could bring the link down. There is also a possibility of support for other sync functions, like if you want to have some, say, sync function. Functions that need to be used, then it is easier or it is better to have a higher stability clock because you can average the clocks across more time. Phase noise impact is reasonably clear, as we all know. Generally, some of these interfaces use the PAM4 type clock. And if you see the horizontal dispersion is because of the phase noise, and if you see the horizontal eye as we call it, and the vertical eye usually happens because of the mid-band noise, because the Clock frequency acquisition or the carrier acquisition is not happening the right way. So, you may not be able to drive the level to the right point.

So, you can have a vertical eye, horizontal happens because of the dispersion. So, the traditional 12 to 20 K has moved on to other. Bandwidths now. We can look at say 20 to 40 or different bandwidths based on the kind of CDR that we have. Mid-band phase noise affects the vertical eye, and both of this introduces the higher EVM. So we can also see from PAM4 people moving into QAM-based systems in the beyond 800. gig systems and all of them will drive to have a low phase noise device, which also needs to have a very good mid-band phase noise. So, this is one of the key when we are looking at say 3D systems that need to have recovery of the 800 gig NBA. We had multiple discussions about the TCs, the transparent clock versus the boundary clocks. As you probably see, this is an HRM, the hypothetical reference model.

Again, I think this is taken from the telecom world to say there is an origin, there is a path to go, and there Is an end, and then people define what are the possible inaccuracies at the points of A, B, C, and D. And this is a reference that is given, and in the original reference, it says you can have different types of, say, clocks that are transferent clocks in between. As you know, transferents are not. Transparent clocks only measure the resident time, the input time, the output time versus the input time, and then pass it on to somebody else to calculate the time. So, in such cases, the stability of clocks doesn't matter. With the current state-of-the-art systems, with say 200 to 400 or 800 that was talked about earlier, if you have even a 100 ppm system, It does not matter much at all.

But what will matter is, for example, if you were to have the links together, the previous example we talked about the links were free running, but if you had the boundary clocks, then all of these links are already in the average zero ppm path. Because the flow is coming, the synchronization is coming from the top, the grandmaster, then all the links are on an average 0 ppm. So, your DSP requirement or the power on or the effort on the DSP to compensate for the frequency is much, much less. So, that is a Significant advantage in the BC if you look at from the power perspective. But if you are running BC on each node, then you will need a better oscillator that is known because now we have low bandwidth servos. We can see some suggestions to have even less than one packet per second in. Band signaling.

Sinky, we had a big discussion whether Sinky was there or not, but we can see in many implementations, Sinky may not be available in such systems. As Greg pointed out, it's a combined, there's only one frequency, there is no non-congruent system. There is a second system, may not be available. There are cases. As Sean mentioned, that if it is, say, intra-data center connectivity, that is a valid point. It may need to go through some other networks, but within one data center, it's all in a single domain. Why not recover the frequency from singy packet PTV packets itself? And people, again, I think I'm going back. to the telecom world, we have something called the class D performance, which is the lowest error, probably 5 nanoseconds dynamic error more total. So, in these cases we have to use a much better local reference to clean up the clocks. That's why some type of oscillators are required here.

So, we can see generally the telecom architecture is generally relatively complex. You it has taken care of all possibilities. You can have a station clock because there was something called a bits clock that was built in 1980. Now, we need to take care of how to integrate. That into the system is already built into when we consider the telecom boundary clock. But that's not required here because it's all new infrastructure and so many of the complexities. And simplified architectures are being preferred. That you have the physical air if it is available. Otherwise, it is a packet-based system, you have a state. Numerically controlled oscillator being driven from a packet layer that creates the clock in the TBC level. If you go higher up, then you might need in the Grand Master, we might also need holdover. Again, this depends on. On how exactly the systems are clocked from the topmost point in the hierarchy in the data center.

If that is using a GPS or GNSS-based system, it will always look for a holdover mechanism. We have multiple mechanisms, we have self-learning oscillators. We have systems that do system level compensation. We have systems that try new type of resonator structures. If you see the lowest bottom one, these are new type of high-end resonators that are available that are based in the suspended quartz mechanism component. Compared to traditional mechanisms where you take the blank and then attach electrodes. This is suspended, and then as you see on the right-hand side, this is deviation of frequency over days. So, if you see, the new systems will settle down to much lower change in frequencies. Over a certain period of time compared to what we could get in a classical way of resonator. So we have mechanisms that can do holdover in the in such forms. So that's an intermediate call to action before Greg takes over. Oh, sorry, my time is up.

So, sorry. Um please uh design with uh uh precision synchronization. Thank you. I was looking at this and I thought it was a good idea. So, yes, so my name is Greg Armstrong. I'm with Renaissance Electronics. We are a silicon timing provider. This is my second time at the conference. I was here two years ago. I gave a presentation about synchronizing the NIC. And one of those things, one of the calls to actions, was: hey, we could probably have many different ways which we Heard today of getting synchronization into the NIC, but then what do we do? How do we actually use it for data centers? Because data centers are saying, hey, we have new applications. I need access to an accurate clock. How do I get it? And a whole bunch of techniques were talked about and things like that. And I said, hey, let's start coming up with some. Options and some good ones came out. We got precision time measurement coming. We also had presentations.

The OCP Nick introduced a means of doing clock distribution using FlexIO. And now what I'm going to talk about is it's actually getting one step even closer. Is the PCI SIG is now looking at this saying, you know what? We also have FlexI/O pins. We also have some availability. What if we gave access to this? Would this help you in clock distribution? So I want to basically give this opportunity to educate everyone saying: hey, may not be aware of this. This is new. It's part of the Chem Gen 7 spec that's going to introduce this. But it allows you to now get access to clocks within the server, so within the system itself, right? So maybe you don't have PTM, or you can use it in combination of PTM to get better accuracies and levels of distribution within the server, which historically has been always based off. Asynchronous clocks, right?

The most precise clock there is probably your PCIe gen clock and the reference clock, and it's like 100 ppm, right? And it likely has spread spectrum on it, can be noisy. It's not a clock that you would go and use to clock your CERDIs, or it's definitely not something you'd want to use if you're trying to measure nanoseconds of accuracies, trying to coordinate a cluster. Of GPUs that are working together and doing stuff like that. So, what are some of the enhancements that we're looking at? Well, as you can see here, very similar to what happened at the OCP-NIC, they started looking at certain pins that historically had use, but over time maybe didn't become as useful, right? Change, different means of distributing things. So, one example here is over the PCI connector. There's actually pins there dedicated to have a full JTAG interface going over it.

But nowadays, you know, JTAG just isn't as important as definitely going over the PCI connector card. The JTAG is likely only maybe beneficial, maybe on. On board or on the card. And so some of these pins were saying, hey, why can't we reuse these pins for other purposes? And so a few generations back for the Chem, they said, well, let's repurpose some of them for the usage of USB and use it there and then go from there. But they had a couple pins they didn't use. They just said, well, we'll just call them flexible. And maybe someday somebody will come up with a great idea. And someone did. Jason Rocket Dell gave a proposal, who's also part of the OCP NIC. He says, hey, why don't we take those pins and use it for distribution of a one PPS? Everyone's talking about one PPS as a way of distributing it, and everywhere you see literature about distribution. A clock off the time card or NIC card, they show a cable.

Well, that's a very poor way of distributing a clock, and it's also very not scalable, right? Every time you add a new card, you gotta get someone in there and screw in the cable. And if you go to OCB Tap there, Jason Rock did a great presentation a couple weeks ago where he showed an example of trying. To hook two cards together with a dedicated cable, and you had to buy like little special tiny cables, and he had to physically warp them to turn them just to come in onto each other, just to go from one card to another card. It's not very scalable, and I'm pretty sure that's not the type of work you want to do. So, with the access to this, we now have a way of Distributing the clock within the system, right? So this is like the first step, right? Because historically, the only clock that really bypassed over the PCIe clock was the PCIe reference clock for use for like common clock, things like that.

It would come from the host into the NIC, right? And then there's your PCIe clock, 100 megahertz type of thing. But that's one-directional, right? Well, what if I got a clock? We talk about ways of distributing a clock getting into from the network. Well, how do I get access to that clock? How do I get it off the NIC? And we heard about PTM, we heard of other things. But the reality is the best way to distribute any sort of clock with the most precision you can get. Is physical. And I think it would be a hard time for someone to argue that. But if you have a physical clock, you can do a lot with it. You can do very precise measurements off it. You can get down into the picoseconds. And the reality is you can get into the femtoseconds because that's the type of clocks that you have to generate to generate high-speed CERDIS clocks for usage of the NIC, anyways.

So, I won't get into this slide too much because we'll just kind of touch about this. But people have been talking about all week already saying, well, what are the needs for synchronization? What are the timing demands? What are they going? And the reality is, it's very difficult to get that answer. But fortunately, in the last few months, Once, a lot of the members of this community, of the OCP TAC community, and others outside of it, went to an organization body and says, You know what, you guys did a great job of defining how to do synchronization and take a requirement and build it by breaking it up. Could you help us? With this. And so they basically said, Hey, you know, how about you do the same thing?

I know it's not normally your thing because you're more involved with the telecom, but it would be great if we could get your help to say, you know, what would you like to see to help define all the components so we can get everyone from the cloud operators all the way down to the industry. Individual component manufacturers to say how can we all participate and deliver synchronization at very high accuracies and precision. And so some of those targets have already been highlighted. They highlighted a couple saying we need some of this already. So I just wanted to highlight this. But the thing is, this is kind of what's needed at the end application. How do I get access to that clock? I could distribute you a very precise clock down into nanoseconds, you know, like white rabbit made claims of sub-nanoseco-that's great. But what do I do with it now? How do I have it? What do I do with it? Right?

So, how do I now start meeting some of these requirements? Which, yes, they might be achievable using some new stuff that's coming out, like P. And all that, but you can see the direction already is going from microseconds to three-digit nanoseconds. You know what's coming next, right? It's going to be double-digit nanoseconds, and somebody out there is going to say, I need single-digit nanoseconds, and here's the application and why I need it, right? And we've heard other talks. From Kevin and that, saying, you know, there's limits in PTM itself that, you know, we can maybe get into the double digits nanoseconds, but getting beyond that's going to be a challenge without some assistance. And so the introduction of this means of distributing timing now within it allows for that assistance, right? It may be used by itself or in May be used in conjunction with PTM.

The other thing that I want to talk about is: although the idea behind it is really to create a clock tree. And this is where maybe there is some misunderstanding when it was introduced for the first time in NOCP-NIC, because they basically followed a very similar traditional telecom architecture, right? Of saying, well, telecom historically had concepts of like line cards where information's coming in and out, and then they had some coordinated time center that's coordinating all these clocks, right? Which they called the time card. And so their architecture they kind of talked about was very much built into this. But for data centers, it's very difficult to go and To talk to all of the server providers or the server manufacturers and say, Hey, I know you need to be a very good time source, and I need you to start integrating high-accuracy OCXOs and all this stuff on it and provide the clock out, right?

Or integrate GNSS receivers into their, like, they'd be like, What are you Talking about, no, that's not going to happen, right? So you have to look at it as: well, no, what we need is a means of distributing the clock so everyone could get access to it, right? But don't do it through cables. Let's try to find a way of doing it. And you can do it through software, but software is going to have some limitations as well, right? Because in the end, you're going to only be as great. As the host, or even the clock that is clocking the host, may have some error in turn to that as well. So you have to look at that. So, the nice thing about this is we could take the, you know, look at how do we turn this into more of like a clock tree and time distribution and take advantage of the signals that now you could start building apps. Applications needs rate on it by plugging cards, right?

So if you need access to the time service somewhere, right, there's talked about the IEEE is doing the P3335, talking about how to implement a time card that can take a time source and stabilize and give you a very good clock. But again, how do you? Get it off it. And they have a nice little diagram and they show it getting off with a cable, right? Well, this now allows you to actually go through the FlexIO pins, and now you can get the clock off that time card, right? And then you can plug in another card like a NIC, right? And maybe it's trying to distribute the clock out into the network, the data network, the O-RAN network, or whatever to do. Maybe even it has to be a dedicated telecom NIC and it has to separate it into a frequency and packet domain. All that could be happening on the NIC, but the source of the clock is coming in through one dedicated pin, right?

And this allows scalability because they're taking the means of defining this interface, and you actually, it's just a multi. Record that you talk to, so a card would plug in and say, Hey, do you support this interface? It would say, Yes, say perfect, lock me in. I'm gonna be a transmitter, or I'm gonna be a receiver, or it could even be both. So, you negotiate kind of what you're gonna be doing as part of that system. And so, it eliminates all this cabling, it eliminates it, you know, the having to send someone to go hook it up. It allows for scalability, right? You could plug in one card, 12 cards, it doesn't matter. And you can also have multi-vendors manufacturing equipment that support these pins and start doing it. So the server really doesn't have to be a centralized time server, it just needs to have a means of getting the clock and distributing it to everyone else that needs it.

Plug in a NVIDIA GPU cluster card that has multiple things, you give it a clock, and it could distribute it and synchronize all the cluster of GPUs right there, right? And things like that. So it gives you a lot of flexibility. But one of the things it talks about, which was interesting, which is great, they say, hey, you can embed the PPS onto the clock and distribute it. Now you have both a frequency component and a phase component on one signal. But the problem is, nowhere is it defined, is what exactly is the embedded pulse per second. So, my presentation here gave an example of a proposal of saying, well, why don't we just define what it means, right? And is there going to be some level of accuracy on how fast that edge has to? Arise and how much of the modulation is so that you can identify where the one PPS term or cycle happens. And then the rest of the clock is just a standard 10 megahertz, 50-50 duty cycle clock, right?

Which can be used for anything, right? You could use a PLL, lock to it, and synthesize a 156.25 megahertz clock for a And things like that. So there's lots of benefits that this brings by, right? You can simplify your system integration, enhances your scalability, improves your performance because you can get, like I said, sub-nanoseconds now in terms of the accuracies because of the physical clock. You can buy off-the-shelf timing devices now that can log. To this, generate clocks from it, and even use that one PPS to make sure the alignment of all those clocks are all in line as well. So, in conclusion, I just want to make everyone aware that this is coming. The ChemSemSVEC just passed their 0.5 version draft, so they're going to start working on it and getting points. The more of the details.

So once the connector supports it, the next thing that's going to come out is now people that are generating PCI Gen 7 devices are going to start looking at: hey, I have access to these clocks. How can I get, how do I utilize them? And so we're now kind of solving that final little last inch, as Kevin always used to call, of saying, How do I get this clock distributed? But I don't have to sit there and say, well, do you have PTM? I know Intel supports it, but do you support it? And all this stuff. All that kind of goes away because it just becomes another clock signal that's coming in or coming out of the device itself. So hopefully that will simplify a lot of that. So with that, I will end it. I went a little bit over, I apologize, and uh open it up for uh discussion and questions. Any questions for the speakers? Hi there.

So again, you you talked about, okay, now you got the pins on the NIC, but wha wh where do you see the the strategy for EPPS and those sort of things being defined? So honestly, I see this is kind of like your first phase of, you know, just like when you really talked about like PCIe, clocks. Gen 1, right? It starts out that you have a very basic way of saying, hey, right now everything might just be free-running clocks, and there, but there's an interface to start distributing the clock. And then the next phase will be like actually doing the distribution. So it will be a stage deployment, right? But I think what we have to get people Excited about or knowledgeable about is making sure those pins aren't just left unconnected for the server manufacturers that are manufacturing the Chem 7 spec, right? And say, hey, don't treat these as optional. Why don't we start putting this in right away?

And like I said, instead of making it a complex clock distribution, Make it simple, right? So it's just basically adding buffers and maybe simple MUX redundancies, right? That could just start out as a very simple way of just getting the clock distributed, right? And then as the applications start getting more mature and established of what's the requirements, then there will probably be generations. Of some spec that will come out, right? It may not be in the chem and maybe somewhere else, that will start saying, well, now we have to start measuring the performance of this clock. What does EPPS have to perform to, and how is that met? So it'll be evolving from that. But I think we had to have a starting point, because right now it's hard to even do. Any sort of demonstration of synchronization within the server without hand soldering or cabling in order to do it.

So if we start getting these systems available, we can start demonstrating more of these applications that were talked about. Hey, I need this precise time. How do I get access to it? And now that we need that. How many pins are we starting with? Just two. And that's all they gave us for PCI sake. There's only two pins. So it's transmit and a receive, right? And it can be either a one PPS signal itself or the EPPS. And again, personally, I would vote for the EPPS, right? Because it gives you the benefit of all the challenges. Heard about low frequency packets per second, it's the same challenges you have with low frequency clocks. It's not that you can't lock to one PPS, but the question would always be: why? Why would you make it so challenging? So, just like 1588 can operate at one packet per second, but why? It opens up challenges, right? You need assistance. Like physical layer, sinky, better oscillators.

So if we go with EPPS right away, it gives that you have this 10 meg that allows you to do much more flexibility in terms of how type of filtering you want to do and stuff like that. Okay, I guess we'll take one last question. Okay, thank you. Uh Ulas you have that uh slice, have that uh Ethernet and PTP goes to that uh server. I I believe that is the one. Yes. I think that is make sense uh simpler. You know we we talked uh previously in our presentation. But uh when the sync E layer get changed, you several the boundaries will decide the time value. So that is also something you need to be very careful, otherwise you may get a much bigger time value. Yeah, absolutely. I think that's a very good point. If you go down to one parts, uh one packet per second or lower and without sync key, then the lock time is going to be very long. It will probably take Tens of minutes to come up. These are.

I just highlighted some of the things that we see in the market and was trying to understand comments from you. Thank you very much for bringing it up. Sorry, can I add one more comment? For Greg, did you think for that EPPS? Go back to the QSPPDD, they standardize that one. They already, that's what the proposal standardized comes from. Yes. So you're right. There's many different, if you Google EPPS or ask ChatGPT what is EPPS, there's many sources. Have publicly started announcing they're looking at using it. So the optical transceiver guys started looking at it as a way of getting a precise time or relationship into it. They defined the embedded pulse per second as well. So I think it's going to become.

More de facto, that more component devices that maybe historically took just physical frequency clocks or maybe a synchronization pulse or a frame pulse or something like that for those in telecom, that EPPS becomes kind of more of a general de facto way because as soon as if you make your frequency And phase and all that traceable and coherent and congruent that we talked about, there's no need to have them separate, right? You can have them the same because they're basically both the same. You won't can't, there is no frequency difference from the one PPS to the 10 megahertz. There is zero PPM, right? They're perfectly synchronized. So there's no need to worry about. That. So it makes all the distribution easier because you can use traditional buffers, you don't have to do any fancy filtering or algorithms. But even just muxing and demuxing it becomes standard kind of phase lock loop practices that are already done today.

So it makes things a lot simpler. Okay, but that's that will. wrap it up thank you speakers and that wraps up our breakouts
