Applications and Use Cases for UALink Enabling Efficient, Open Networking for AI Scale-Up Systems

All right, so you guys do have to put up with me again for another 25 minutes. In this case, I'm going to moderate a panel of experts. Very fortunate to be joined with a number of the companies and their key members from UA Link. And with that, I'll let you guys introduce yourselves. Sure. Good morning, everyone. My name is Chris Peterson. I'm a fellow at Astera Labs. I lead our technology and solution architecture team. I'm also on the board of directors of ULINC. Hello, everybody. My name is Josh Collier. I'm with Intel Corporation. And I represent the GPU networking interests. Hi, I'm Rohit Mithal. So I work at Upscale AI. I'm part of the products and technologies team for our Scale Up products. Greetings, everyone. My name is Priyank Shukla. I am Director of Product Management for Scale Up and Scale UI. out IPs at Synopsys. I'm also Secretary and Board of Director of ULINC Consortium. Nice to talk with you. All right.

So with a great panel, we'll start a discussion and then invite you guys to ask questions as well. So please be thinking of questions that you might have for the panelists. But I'm going to start with A couple of questions that I had here is: why did your company join UALINC as the consortium? And what are some of the challenges you see with AI scale-up? And what are some of the advantages that UA-LINK brings to the table? Maybe I can get started. So, from Synopsis side, we announced the availability of intellectual property for both controller as well as physical layer in December of 2024. And the reason we did that is we saw that UALink provides a way to innovate at a cluster level. So, the cluster is acting as a computer. Cluster is not just networking. The way memory is made available to each node pays equal importance in the execution of those machine learning algorithms.

So, while we were working with customers, we serve 100-plus customers who are in machine learning space. So, they are trying to tweak with these models and they are trying to see which models. Will run best if memory is made available maybe a nanosecond faster, or if the network latency goes down a nanosecond faster. So UALink provided that opportunity to provide an option to innovate. So that's where Synopsys joined and provide the IPs for it. So just building on Priyank's point, right? So what we have seen, and Curtis, your question about like why scale-up is important, right? So if we analyze data, if you look at the performance improvement from just the chip scale from say H to B, it's about 2x. But we all know that when they put the GPUs in a rack, like the NVL72, The performance uplift was 30x, right? Jensen showed that at GTC. And all of that performance improvement is coming from the scale-up networking. A big chunk is that.

So that tells you how critical scale-up is going to be for the future. And our viewpoint at upscale was: you know, this is. So critical that it needs the whole community to come together to build something which everybody can use. It cannot be just a vertically integrated closed ecosystem. And UALink is one of those ecosystems, right? And we have been contributing to UALINC, Sonic, other open ecosystems as well. So I think everybody has to come together. Given the criticality of scale-up for the future of AI. So I'll continue on the row here. One of the main reasons, I think one of the big themes I've noticed this past couple days here is power. Everybody's looking about power. And I don't think a lot of people have really paid. Too much attention of how bandwidth efficiency of a network matters drastically.

When you're trying to build an accelerator or something and achieve a certain amount of memory bandwidth, you have to decide how many ports of something do I need to attach to that device. And if the bandwidth efficiency of that network is Not as best as it can be. You're basically saying that I have to add extra power. I have to add more ports, more switches, more optics, whatever, more channels, more copper cables, everything that's involved to get that, achieve that bandwidth. And UAL, one of the things that excites us really about UAL is this, it is. Designed from the ground up to achieve the best performance for these workloads. And so we're really excited about that. We're really excited about the confidential compute aspects where the security is built in with very low overhead. No other network has achieved that to date. And we're excited about the future prospects of this network as well.

With collective offload being in sight within December of this year. So, those are all great things that really make UAL stand out. And maybe I'll just round it out here. I'll add that in terms of why we joined, I mean, for us specifically at Astera Labs, we're absolutely focused on open standards, right? We believe strongly in the value of them and the importance of them. And I think in the context of UALINK, the consistent message that we're getting from customers is that it's the Wild West out there right now. There's way too many different ways of doing more or less the same type of thing. So, if we can align on a common standard for scale up so that we can deploy our XPUs, our GPUs faster, so that we can meet the demands of these continuously evolving AI models and get the TCO benefits at the same time that the team's already talked about here, that's a very Critical importance, right?

So we believe strongly in that, and we're seeing that with UILink specifically, that is exactly what we're driving towards. And a big piece of that is ensuring that there is compliance, there is interoperability between the different XPU implementations and the switches themselves, because that allows us all. To work together and to move faster as an ecosystem. Excellent. Well, thank you all. So, one of the things, you know, as an ecosystem comes together, is we've got to get products out there. And that comes in stages, right? And so, Priyank, your company. Is kind of at the early side of it with IP. One of the questions I get a lot is: hey, when can I start developing? Give us some insight there. So, the great thing with UA-Link is they have not reinvented the wheel. The physical layer is leveraged from IEEE 802.3dj, which is 200 gig series. And from Synopsys, we have. Have that core for more than four years.

We have been demonstrating it, interoperating it. And in Supercompute 25, we will have a demo of it running over OSFP cable. So that's the physical layer. From the controller point of view, again, this was incremental. For UA Link, we use the transaction layer and data link layer, which uses the flit, which is so. Of incremental over PCI, the work we have done. So we had those core. So we put together a tiger team at Synopsys and came up with a solution. And we have delivered our controller to our customers already. So the IP is available today. We have customers who are planning their tape out by end of this year to mid of next year. And then for the other folks. I'm not trying to get you to talk about your roadmaps, but when should the audience start to think about putting this into their labs? When should they start to think about putting it into their data centers?

I think given the criticality of Scale Up and the huge momentum UALINC has in your previous presentation. You alluded to that. Next year is when I think it's safe to say that we would have something coming out, right? And then volume deployment the following year. The critical point, like as Chris alluded to, is the fact that interoperability, you know, to get something deployed, it's very Very critical, you have a history of PCIe and all of those other protocols. The thing that made it go succeed was the interoperability. So that's going to be a key focus going forward. And what do you guys think is, you know, kind of the key things that need to be put in place for our Our customers to be successful. Maybe I'll start with that. So I think with any new technology, there's a bunch of enablement phases that we need to go through. And to Priyank's point, right, this really starts in the pre-silicon timeframe.

So when those IPs are developed by folks like Synopsys. It's more than just the IP that needs to be built, right? So you need to do verification IP that comes with that so that you can ensure that different IPs are interoperable, that you find all the bugs in pre-silicon as quickly as possible, so that when the silicon does come back, it's as capable and bug-free as you can make it. The other aspect of that is: you know, there's a need to do. Emulation early on. So there's work happening, for example, to do emulation with different implementations across different XPUs or different switches as well. So as you move forward from there, then it's a question of as you get the silicon back, how do you ensure that everything's interoperating correctly? And of course, there's multiple steps in that.

Right, you start at the electrical level, you move through the protocol and transport layers, make sure the features are working correctly, your training mechanisms are working, your discovery and so on, your reset flows. And then we get into the higher levels of the stack from there. So we build the boards, we build the systems, we build. The racks, and we build the software that integrates all of this and brings it together. So you'll hear more today and tomorrow in terms of what UALink is doing around the management aspects there to make that as seamless from an integration perspective into things like Sonic as well. So that way, when the silicon is back, we're hitting the ground running. And Josh, you've been a great voice in spec building, right? Really appreciate all the input that you've brought to the groups. What do you see as the key pieces of building a spec and the industry coming together that gives UALink its advantages?

So there's been quite a great there's really been a great collaboration between the member companies that have come forth and I think we were able to quickly get to agreements of what needs to be done, what was important, how to solve those challenges and how to get it into paper and that's really what Is going to make this a very viable and successful ecosystem here for UAL. And you can see everybody's already off running. This spec didn't take years to produce. This spec took literally months. And we continue on that, right? I think we know what needs to be done. The hard part sometimes is just putting it down. On paper, and then getting everybody executing around that. I think that's the what you see here today is the positive outcome of all that. Excellent. Excellent. So, sounds like we've got the spec ready, we've got the pieces in place. As I look out and think about What we're going to see.

Are there other enabling pieces that need to be brought to the table either by the consortium or by the people that are getting ready to use it? Maybe I can jump in. So, the integrators list we are working on, the interoperate event. With Ethernet Alliance. That's one of the key differentiators of UA Link Consortium: that there's going to be a prototyping platform where individual implementers can bring their devices and interop. So that's something we are planning from the UALing Consortium point of view, as PCI SIG used to do. As Rohit was mentioning, that PCI SIGING. SIG has an integrators list. So it was very easy for anybody to go to PCI SIG website and see that integrators list and be assured that the devices will interop with each other. And ULING Consortium is doing that same thing. So Synopsys will provide a prototyping platform where the layer 3, layer 4 can be synthesized on an FPGA-based emulation.

Or prototyping, and then you can interoperate with the device. So that's another level in ensuring interoperability. And maybe I'll add one here as well, given this is OCP. I think there's a lot of work starting to happen around the switch platforms itself. And as I'm sure you've seen on the show floor, there's Quite a variety of different rack implementations at this point. But I think it's important within that context for us to then jointly work on. At least let's see if we can align on some reference designs, right? Because that way we can start with saying, okay, if you want to make some changes, maybe you're a 19-inch RAC versus a 21-inch versus Whatever width you're at these days. At least we're starting with a common building block, right? And then you can change the dimensions or change how you're packaging things or cooling things or however from there.

But more time spent on building those types of reference architectures, in particular in a forum like OT. I think it would be very helpful. Excellent. One of the things that, as a consortium, we do is we work across other groups. So we have alliances with UEC, IEEE, DMTF, OCP, obviously. What's your Input on why those are important? Why do you see the groups working together? Maybe I'll start with you, Rohit. Yeah, like I think, so UALINC is part of the full stack, right? It's the networking part. Like I mentioned before, and we've talked about it, going forward, RAC is. Becoming more of the unit of AI, correct? So if you think from first principles, you need compute, you need power, cooling, all of those aspects. So this is where OCP is amazing, right? Because they bring all of these other pieces which needs to work with the networking to build a performant, perf TCO optimized solution.

And so I think interoperating and making alliances with OCP so that all of the goodness from this consortium works with the goodness from OCP. As an example, my colleagues alluded to Sonic and Sai, those abstractions which would be needed for manageability. Of the switches, those are aspects which make the whole rack work well. So that's why I believe the alliances with OCP is hugely impactful. I have a comment on that too. You know, we're not trying to carry the water here, we're trying to ride the wave. You know, so UAL didn't go out and invent a It didn't invent the physical layer. That was critical importance here. And it'll continue on, right? The evolution of UAL will have to go and look and say, what's the next physical media technology that we need to adopt and support, and how do we keep advancing this industry? So it is imperative to partner with.

These other organizations, including IEEE, 802.3, all those other ones that we will leverage and benefit from their work as well. All right. So, you know, we've talked a lot about what we are, but how about where we're going? Right? Where do you? How do you see the needs, or how do we meet the needs of AI as it moves forward? And what are the key characteristics that we need in a UA-LINK to make that happen? I can probably start. So, the first will be to see the real deployment in 2026 towards the end. Creating an interoperable ecosystem. So, the day we will be successful is you can buy one accelerator, have one switch, and have another accelerator, it works together. So, that's number one, I would say, it's my from a personal point of view. And then, second would be a different physical medium and adding more features to make this more efficient. For example, ink is something in network.

collective, a lot of our implementers are looking forward to. So listening very closely because we are nimble, we are 115 organizations, so I will still call us nimble. PCI SIG has 1,000. So we listen very intently to our customers and include those features as an ECN. So that would be immediate challenge from my point of view. So I'll add on to that. So I think it's three fundamental things. So we're going to need to continue to go faster, which means we're going to need to go to higher data rates. We're going to need to go to higher Radix, which means more GPUs connected. And we're going to need to go farther. We can't continue to pack everything into racks. We can safely assume there will be deployments that require multi-rack or multi-row, even at some point. So that drives a distance challenge, right? And of course, at some point, copper is not going to take us there, even with signal conditioning products in the path of copper.

So that means the next. phase here will certainly include optics as a part of that. So I think that combination of things is really as a group what we're totally driving towards. And we've seen some stuff here in the conference of kind of a single layer of single level of switch versus multi-level of switch. Do we think we need wider radic switches, multi-level switches, some combination? How is that going to work? Royan, you want to help us with that? Yeah, I would say all of those. You know, things are moving so fast and it's difficult to pinpoint, but having Having fungibility in a standard and having fungibility in infrastructure is going to be key. And having all of these abilities inside the spec would enable ULing to remain relevant for all of these future deployments. Guys, a chance, just some closing comments. So, I would just say that this cluster acting as a compute is a new tool for humankind.

And whenever humankind gets a tool, they play very well with it. And that's how innovation happens. So, we are seeing a lot of innovative ways of implementing this cluster, adding memory. And UA Link provides a very efficient and interoperable open way to implement many algorithms which are coming up. So, and also this UA Link consortium is listening intentively where the market is going with the new models, mixture of expert, where different kinds of parallelism is needed in the cluster. Those features are also planned from ULING Consortium. So that's what we want to bring to the table, and that's what we are very excited to do. I think from my side, you know, scale-up is becoming very critical, whether you call it cluster as a unit or RAC, it's a unit of AI, and having an open ecosystem.

System where all of us come together and contribute towards solving this huge challenge because one company by itself can't do it is going to be a very impactful thing for all of us as builders. I think my comment is that scale up will always remain a very Important aspect of these AI workloads. It's going to be a challenge. I think working in the ecosystem here and leveraging the innovation from multiple companies together is probably the best way to solve those challenges going forward. And it will buckle up, it will be a wild ride. I would just add here that I think you've heard a lot about scale-up in the last couple of days alone. And just that energy, that level of focus, that level of interest just tells you how important this is for the industry at this point. And I think what we're seeing is we're seeing the same thing from customers, right? We're getting a lot of questions, a lot of interest in UALINC.

And as we've talked here as a panel today, all the ingredients are here. They're being built, the ecosystem is coming together, the products are coming. And I think to echo the folks here, really people are coming together. And they are making this happen. And not just for one generation here, but for multiple generations. There's a lot more to come. And I think taking an open and collaborative approach as a part of a consortium like this is an effective way to help us jointly solve this more quickly. Yep. All right. Well, thank you. Now we do have about five minutes for questions. So I encourage you to come up to the mic and ask our experts. Hi. So Curtis, you ended the last session saying that SUE and UA-Link can coexist. So I was wondering how customers would choose when they're thinking about their applications and use cases. How would they choose between the two? I'll let the panel answer since I had my chance.

That was for you, right? You asked for Curtis, right? Yeah, specifically. Okay, I'll take that. He's become a panelist. He seeded the question, but I would like the panel's view on this. Yeah, again, there's nothing That makes Ethernet not acceptable, but when you look at the latency challenges it has, the power and the size on the silicon, UA-Link just brings advantages in those spaces. When I consider Right now, Ethernet is kind of the fabric that's out there. We're working on UALINK, so Ethernet is good for now. UA-Link is really the future. But love to get other inputs. I think I would chime in on this a little bit here. So there is not one Ethernet in the world. There are many different flavors of Ethernet. What is being proposed for a scale-up network of Ethernet is vastly different than I think the Ethernet that most people think of today in your data centers and other places.

You know, the complexity of routing and other things of that nature. UAL has looked at all that. We didn't go into this without saying, hey, could we reuse this? You know, everybody starts out and says, Hey, is there a technology I can use today? And the reality is, you know, we all looked at this and said, No, there's no technology that really gives us the optimization point we're looking for here. And that I think you'll see is the big differentiator. And hopefully, next year when we get together. You'll see a lot of products on the floor, hopefully. And you'll see the support that we think is. Thank you. Let's go to the next question so we can get some in, yeah. So at this summit, there was the announcement of the ESUN work stream, which kind of formally acknowledges there's a layering, if you will. There's a transport for scale up.

versus kind of the lower layers and it's sort of acknowledging that and and saying that there are other scale up transports. Do you see that creation of that separation helping or hurting in a UA-Link adoption? Can I take that? Yeah. So Ethernet is a layer one, layer two protocol. And on top of that, you can run different transport layer, networking layers, and make your stack. What ESAN has done has come up with some directions for layer 4, for transport layer. And Ethernet was always used to create these clusters. Even before the ChatGPT moment, right, from 2012 onwards, RDMA, Rocky were used. To create and create this kind of performance for a cluster. But UA Link provides a differentiated way, it eliminates the networking layer. There is one hop switch, and you can connect ThazN24 accelerator. So the performance you will get from this cluster will be really differentiated. But is this the only cluster in the world?

Is this cluster going to really? Run all the machine learning algorithm. Is this the cluster is going to do all recommendation? No. You need more models, you need more cluster. So, what this ESAN effort is, it will build a standardization on Ethernet and address those machine learning algorithms. All right, thank you. Next question. I think my question is probably answered. There is a lot of confusion on me on the ESOM and the UALINC. What is like how this ESOM will affect the UA-Link spec or market? Anyone want to try that? Sure. A quick shot at that. So I don't think eSense is going to affect UA-Link spec at all, right? UA-Link knows what it wants to do, it's doing it. I think what you're going to see is that there's obviously, just like in here, there are options. OCP doesn't say there's one way to do anything in the world, okay? You can see that with even managing a of a network switch.

You have companies that advocate for Sonic, some companies advocate for FBOS. There's not one right way of doing anything in the world. There's definitely multiple ways of solving those challenges. So I think what you're seeing here with ESUN is people saying, okay, we have Ethernet. What do we have to change to make it better? So it's not Ethernet that you have today. It's Ethernet. What do we change in Ethernet? Let's come together and start out. If you've heard some of the other talks today, there's no plan right now even for a collective offload in that area, right? That has to be envisioned. And so I think my initial take on this is it's a step back. From where the process that we're through here, we're going to be seeing products and stuff in hand really soon. And I think this is another way of doing it.

Nothing wrong with that, but I think there's a lot of thought that needs to go into it before we're going to get something that's meaningful or competitive out of that. Thank you. I don't know who is first, but let me go over here. Hi, Robin Bringley, Broadcom. I just wanted to clarify a little bit. So, Ultra Ethernet, the spec, the 100 spec, is already out, and there is silicon available already with low latency, high wire speed, efficiency, and it really is. Ethernet. You were making a comment earlier. There's different flavors of Ethernet. Well, there are features on top of Ethernet and transport layer protocols and all sorts of things, but basically getting a link running and getting things running, that's just Ethernet. Ultra Ethernet is at base layer still Ethernet.

So, I just wanted to clarify that all of the things, and I saw the upscale AI talk earlier, there are things in Sue, for example, compressed headers specifically for memory transactions, right? That wasn't modeled, and that's fine. It may be future work, right? Maybe it's something they'll look at in the future. But I just want to kind of level set and make sure we're all on the same page. All right, thank you. Okay. Yeah, my question is more about the business model. So look at what the Emmy Link Fusion is going to do, and they can go to Intel, say that we'll pay you $5 billion to go. With the MV-Link, and how are you going to build UA-Link CPU with this MV-Link CPU? And also, that MVDI can go to any other hyperscaler that okay, I can give you the MV-Link fusion, use the MV-Link. So you end up with the UAL. Link without really any customers. Yeah, so maybe there's some confusion, right?

So UA Link connects GPUs together as a backside network. Right. And that allows for any switch vendor and any Accelerator vendor to use that link. Yeah, but you have to build a new switch. Yes. The NVLink switch is already there. So you hold it. Yes, but you have a single supplier, right? We're here trying to keep it. In the real world, it doesn't care. Okay, I disagree. A single supplier is never a good option in the world, period. I went through the open RAN process. And it's a great idea talking about the open system everybody, every vendor can use. But you end up with only three vendors. I would advise you to even take it out in the foyer, go look at NVIDIA's MGX wall. They're advocating for the fact that they have. Six companies to provide a bus bar, or six companies to so a single supplier is never the right. That's why we're here at OCP.

We want openness, we want competitive environments, we want innovation, we don't want to rely on a single provider in the world for anything. Yeah, ideally, it's great, yeah. But I really. I just want you to think about how you can promote UALINC so that they can overcome that incumbent. Some algorithms will run better in UALINK. NV-Link, with the network collectives they have, run some CUDA-based very well. There are new algorithms with Mixture Def Expo. But there are different types of parallelism needed. So maybe this is a good alternative. Yeah, so I I know that you for MULink you have to use the actual compute slice to do the uh nickel library stuff. And uh it can actually take your resources away from actual compute. But uh still that uh no, everything's established already. I think we just have a difference of opinion on open being at an advantage. Well, thanks all panelists. You made some comments about looking forward.

Could you please comment specifically in context of How ULINK will apply to memory expansion, and what use cases do you foresee in that terms? What could be the timelines? And the last one is like when do you foresee newer things like Currency, for example, to be supported within UALINC, and what use cases could potentially benefit from it, or market segments that could benefit from it. Thank you. Maybe I'll take a quick stab at this. So, first of all, UALINC was intentionally for not to support coherency. So that was not a focal point, and that's not the intent of UILink at this point. I think CXL already does a pretty good job of solving coherency. And if you want coherent memory, CXL memory exists today, right? We built a controller, I'd be happy to talk to you about it, for example. So that's, in some ways, a solved problem, right? So you can use that if you'd like to use it.

In terms of where memory will attach, I think this is in general an interesting area of further exploration when it comes to AI systems. There's quite a different way, a variety of ways today to attach memory or memory. Like devices into the memory hierarchy in some of the newer AI systems, right? People are using memory on the CPU side, they're using SSDs, maybe they're just distributing across more systems or distributing across more GPUs. So exactly how that evolves. remain to be seen. But if there's a strong enough need, a strong enough use case to attach memory on UALINK, I think that is certainly something that we'd love to see people bring in that idea, those concepts, and the need there into the consortium. And we'd be happy to talk through how we would enable that in the future. Right, well we've hit our time limit. Thank you to our esteemed panelists, and thank you to the audience as well. Thank you, everyone.
