Beyond the Spec: What it Takes to Deploy UALink at Rack Scale

All right. Good afternoon. Thank you for joining us here at the tail end of lunch, or maybe during lunch for some of you. So, my name is Chris Peterson. I'm a fellow here at Astero Labs, and today we're going to spend a little bit of time talking about.

How the ecosystem is evolving with UALINK, and how do we deploy UA-Link as quickly and efficiently as possible. Thank you, Chris. And hello, everyone. Welcome. My name is Ahmad Dinesh.

I run product management at Astero Labs, and really excited to talk to you about a lot of the work that we've been doing along with ecosystem partners. Well, over a year or so to really advance UA-Link as fast as possible. So, really, what we want to start with is talking about what are the challenges and needs for a truly open and purpose-built scale-up solution. First of all, of course, we need a really good protocol, we need a TCO. Performance optimized protocol that's really built from the ground up to deliver to the unique requirements of scale-up, both from a performance perspective, a reliability perspective, and a scalable perspective.

And so, of course, we have UA-Link as that solution. We'll dive deeper into each of these areas as well. We need to be scalable so that we can actually. Get from a component level to a switch tray level to the rack level, and we'll walk you through those. And of course, making sure that it's deployable, making sure we have all the rack management capabilities, both from a tray perspective, from pod controllers' perspective, and a lot of the software work that needs to go towards delivering that.

And of course, once you Then deploy it, making sure that you can get the most out of the hardware that you've deployed. Making sure you have maximal utilization, maximizing application uptime, and having the RAS capabilities as a solution to deliver that. Then, of course, data privacy. A lot of these solutions are going to be running in multi-tenant situations where data privacy. Is going to be critical within that, and UA Link has already defined that and can be continuing to advance that.

And then finally, from a fast time-to-market perspective, how do we get there really quickly, especially since UALINC is a truly open-purpose-built protocol having interoperability solutions to making sure that we can advance it but make Making sure that's reliable and deployable with confidence. So, UALINC actually started back in October 234 over a year ago, but of course the work had started well before then. Very quickly after that, we released the UALINC 1.0 specification that delivered the performance, the high-band. Bandwidth, low latency requirements, as well as the silicon efficiency, both from a power consumption as well as an area perspective, to deliver the best performance per watt. And now we're already working on the next generation of UA-link specification to deliver even more performance within network compute capabilities to be able to even.

Reduce and reduce the power consumption to be able to deliver even more performance per watt. So, to do this and deliver a full rack-level solution, Astera Labs, along with a lot of ecosystem parts, we have multiple GPU and accelerator partners that we've been working with to actually integrate UA-Link into the. Their solutions. Having the UA-Link switches, the UA-Link retimers that can actually be able to deliver these. So, of course, we need the chips.

But then, past that, we have to have the full UA-Link platforms. The compute trays, the switch trays that fundamentally go into the full rack, having the full reference designs and true. Truly open reference designs that can be interchangeable between different partners. And then finally, having full UA-Link 200 gig racks, leveraging, of course, a lot of the OCP collaboration efforts that have been happening and advancing those even further towards cable backplane solutions and full pod controllers that can be integrated and leveraging. The existing infrastructure wherever possible and advancing them even further.

So, with that, I'll pass it back to Chris to really dive into some of the software capabilities. So, now that we have built the IP for this, which is readily available today, and the silicon is coming next. Next year, and the platforms and the boards being built around that, we need to think about: okay, how do we start integrating this into the rack itself? And so, from a rack-level perspective, there are three fundamental components required to be able to build these scale-up types of fabrics. So, there are three pieces: there's the UALink pod controller.

There's a node management agent, and there's a switch management agent. And the function of the UI Link pod controller is essentially to detect, identify, and configure all of the components basically that are part of that scale-up fabric. So that includes the XPUs and the switches, and it provides. The management entity, essentially, that entry point to be able to configure these racks at the end, as well as the individual components themselves. So it'll do things like assign the IDs to each of the components, any of the virtual pod configuration or V-pods that.

Are required. And typically, this pod controller will run in an environment where you're already doing some rack level management. A lot of these racks already have a rack level management entity of some kind. Either it's a separate box that's running at the top of the rack, or sometimes it's embedded on a virtual machine somewhere on one of the hosts, and you're doing. Management across a whole row or even a cluster level.

There's different places you can put it. But fundamentally, you need to run this pod controller somewhere to provide the overall orchestration. So the next piece here is within the compute trays themselves, there are the XPUs, and some configuration is required for those as well. So there's a Node management agent that runs in that part of that system. So typically this runs on a BMC, so nothing too new on that aspect.

So we're just adding some additional capability there to make sure that the XPUs can be properly configured so that when the discovery mechanism happens, the XPUs are correctly identified. You can ensure that they are correctly configured as part of the correct VPOD, and that there's enough isolation implemented to know that you're actually using the correct XPU with the correct ID. The final component here is the switch management agent itself. And so this runs on the Switch trays or the scale-up switch trays. So there's different places you can run this.

There are some implementations that actually will run this on a BMC. So you could do this, for example, within an open BMC environment. The other common place that you can run this is, you know, in a typical Top Iraq style implementation, you have something like a Commune. Module that you're running with a CPU and some network operating system like Sonic, for example. And so you have the switch management agent that can run there.

This communicates with the switches through the OCP-defined SAI interface that UA-Link is adding some additional extensions to. To ensure that you can use that exact same existing infrastructure to do the switch-level configuration as well. So, this is a pretty deep subject, and there's a lot more that we could go into. Obviously, I don't have time to go through all of that today, but there is an excellent session on this topic specifically tomorrow afternoon if you'd like to learn more. Another key component here, of course, is we need to make sure that the systems are reliable, they're available, and they're serviceable.

So, RAS is a huge topic in and of itself. Again, I'm not going to do it just as today, but the short version is: all of the fundamental characteristics that you would expect from RAS are things that have already been considered. So, the error correction mechanisms in terms of at the same time. The link level, things like CRCs and FEC mechanisms are already built in. We're leveraging a lot of that from existing standards as well.

Link-level retry is one of the primary functions that's implemented as part of the data link layer. And then the mechanisms required for end-to-end data protection as well as handling link down events. Are also leveraged from existing mechanisms. So, if we have the correction side covered, we now need to talk about the error handling as well. Since we're talking about a new transport mechanism here, we need to make sure we have the transport-level error handling mechanisms as well, because links can and will fail, so we need to be able to handle those in a graceful fashion.

And take those links down without affecting some of the other traffic. So, as a part of that, UILink has defined a couple of mechanisms for that. One of them is called a TL or transaction layer drop mode. There's a UPLI-level mechanism as well called originator drop mode, and then finally an isolation mode, which allows you to put a link into isolation. Isolation while you figure out what's going on with that particular link.

The third piece here really is you need an error injection mechanism to be able to test all of these capabilities as well. So there will be hooks provided for that. And then finally, you need some way of notifying some management entity, for example, the pod controller. That an event has occurred so that you can go take some form of action, whether it's changing the configuration, replacing a device, and so forth. Of course, security is a fundamental requirement here as well.

Generally, these types of systems are deployed in cloud-like environments or cloud environments. So therefore often you're partitioning these racks or these multiple racks into different segments. In this case, UALink refers to them as virtual pods. So you can assign each of those pods and the XPUs associated with them to a particular tenant. That of course requires security.

As a part of that. So, as part of UALINC, there's a very lightweight security mechanism that's built in and provided as part of the spec and defined. So, this is AAS GCM-based, so it's a fairly lightweight implementation, but still provides end-to-end protection. So, in the 1.0 specification, the way this is done is that. The XPU sourcing the request will encrypt it at a higher layer of the stack that gets passed completely encrypted through the entire fabric and gets unencrypted at the other end.

There's also an integrity mechanism defined in the form of authentication tags, which can be optionally enabled as well to add a further layer of security. Here. So, in terms of interoperability, this is crucial and again a large subject in itself, and there's a lot of work happening here. This is important to think about not just when silicon comes back, but early on as well. So, there's a bunch of work happening right now in terms of ensuring that the IPs themselves.

Are completely interoperable. So that's happening through emulation, it's happening through verification IPs and several other mechanisms across multiple companies to ensure that there is compatibility even before the silicon shows up. Finally, of course, when the silicon does actually show up, we want to make sure that any XPU can work with any. Switch as that's a fundamental tenant of UILink, and the goal is to have seamless interoperability here. So, the UILink Consortium has defined a compliance program which will launch next year, and you can expect to start seeing products going through that process.

Of course, the coverage here is important. I won't have time to go through it all. But the key here is that we're going to have full coverage for that. Thanks, Chris. As you can see, it takes a lot to make a new technology, especially a highly high-performance solution like UA-Link, successful.

And at Asterilab, we've been working with a lot of the ecosystem partners to deliver on each. Of these capabilities, really to be able to make solutions available next year and really deployable by 2027. We're focused on a lot of the scale-up switch capabilities, the retiming solutions within this space. There's a lot more work to be done here as well. We welcome you all to join a lot of the work that's already being done today and continue advancing.

That, whether that's joining the UALINC Consortium, you can also just start by even reading through the specifications or the OCP and UALINK partnerships. Or if you just want to talk to us at the event here as well to learn more and understand what is being done and what more can be done to be able to advance UALINC, please come find us. And I know I think we are running out of time. So, I think we might cut it here and find us afterwards if you have any questions. Thank you.

Thank you.
