Biochar in Data Center Decarbonization

Cool, so I'm Dr. Seth Kane. I work at the UC Davis Materials Decarbonization and Sustainability Center, where we work on developing roadmaps and tools for decarbonizing the built environment and materials like concrete, steel, and plastic. And so, whereas some of the later talks are going to be talking about improving cooling of data centers or computing infrastructure, I'm going to be talking about the actual physical foundations of those data centers, how those contribute to emissions from those data centers, and how we can reduce those. So, why does the tech industry care?

About this physical infrastructure that's going into these data centers. So, the first reason is you're using a lot of it, and that amount is really quickly growing. So, the amount of cement used in data centers in the US is expected to triple by 2027, from 2022. And that's just in the US. This is happening globally as well.

And so, we're really using thousands. And thousands of tons of these materials to build data centers, and those materials are responsible for a lot of greenhouse gas emissions. So, when companies have these goals to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions, this is one of these areas where we need to be thinking about reducing quickly growing emissions. However, this does create a pathway. To store carbon in that physical infrastructure.

So, you're using a lot of these materials, so that allows you to store a lot of carbon in those materials. And one pathway to do that is through the use of biochar. We'll be talking a little bit about what exactly biochar is in a second. But the important thing here is tech companies already are the largest buyers of biochar, and they're doing this on the carbon. Credit market to offset other hard-to-abate emissions.

And so, the argument that I want to be making here is that it's more effective for these companies to be putting that biochar into their physical infrastructure than buying these offsets. And it's important to note that this is not the only carbon credit mechanism that's out there. When we look at carbon credits that are sold, biochar is down the list. But when we look at carbon credits that are delivered, biochar is at the top of the list. And so these are the emissions reduction credits that are being delivered today, and because it is an actual physical material that does allow us to use it in these data centers.

Okay, so what is biochar? It's currently the most Most delivered carbon dioxide removal credit globally. And it's produced by taking any biomass source, and hopefully that's a residual biomass source, so for example, wheat straw or forestry residues, and heating that up without oxygen. So when we do that, we trap that carbon that's in that biomass in a solid, long-lived form that's stable for hundreds to thousands of years. And to kind of add on to that, what is concrete?

So it's a mixture of a few things. The important component is cement, which is the chemically processed piece. And that's where most of the greenhouse gas emissions associated with concrete come from, about 90%. But we're also mixing that in with some water and some sand and gravel to produce the whole material. And we can use biochar in this concrete in a few different ways.

First is by replacing a fraction of that cement. This has the upside of that's where those emissions come from. So if we're using less cement, there's less emissions from that. However, that does also contribute most of the strength of that material. So if we replace too much of it, We can end up with some detrimental material property impacts, and this limits the amount of biochar we can use there.

Second is replacing that sand component. This has the advantage of that there's a lot of it in there, and so we can potentially replace a lot of it. However, there's a lot more uncertainty in how this impacts the properties of the concrete. And it's quite low in cost to start with, so this is going to result in a greater increase in cost. And it doesn't contribute a lot to emissions, so a little bit less reduction in emissions than replacing our cement.

And then finally, could keep doing what the tech industry is doing currently, which is just buying that biochar as carbon credits, having it be used somewhere else. This is the advantage of that you're not limited by the design of your structure. So, if you need to hit a certain strength, then putting that much biochar into the material would not allow that. That's still possible if you're just purchasing these carbon credits. However, it does shift the use of that biochar to other industries, and oftentimes, folks can be a little.

Bit skeptical about carbon credits, whereas if you have that biochar in your physical infrastructure, you can point to it and say, there's our carbon dioxide removal here in our concrete. One of the key things I want to highlight here, and this comes up a lot when talking to other material scientists about this, is not all biochars are equal. So if you hear someone say one thing about one biochar, Biochar. That might not be true somewhere else about a different biochar. And this is important when talking about emissions, because how we produce the biochar matters a lot.

The key takeaway here is going to be on that very bottom flow in. In that efficient scenario, we have no fossil fuel inputs coming in there. It's just using heat from earlier processes. Little fossil fuels for startup energy, whereas on the right, in the poor practices scenario, we're using a lot of fossil fuels. As a result, that efficient scenario is very likely to be storing carbon.

So, this is a distribution of a bunch of different process parameters, trying to represent what's currently the best and worst practices in the biochart. Industry. And those that are kind of having worse practices, it's really uncertain whether that material is actually removing carbon or not. So where that biochar comes from matters a lot. What that biochar is made from also matters for how it performs.

So the important thing here is we kind of want to be conservative. These are new materials. The construction industry doesn't like change. So we've kind of got a conservative baseline there. And the only things that are meeting that are our rice-based and our wood-based biochars of the materials that we've looked at.

And there also, this same thing impacts the amount of carbon stored in that biochar. So if we look at a bunch of different feedstocks, Depending on how much carbon is in that feedstock to start with, we get different amounts stored in our concrete. And our race straw, which unfortunately was doing the best there in strength, is doing the worst in the amount of our carbon stored. That's because these two things are related. You can see that that's increasing with our silica content, that's increasing with our carbon content.

And so, more. Silica inherently means less carbon. So, what does this all mean? How do we put this all together and actually use these materials in concrete in data centers? So, I've got three bars here: one's looking at wood-based biochar replacing that aggregate component, one's looking at wood-based biochar replacing that cement component.

And one's looking at rice hole-based biochar replacing that cement component. On the left side of each of those bars, that's where we see really high confidence across the scientific literature that that amount of biochar addition is going to result in an increase in strength. And on the right side, we see a lot of uncertainty. So about half the scientific literature reporting on that material shows an increase in strength. And we can see that that has a big impact on how much emissions we can reduce, but that overall we're reducing more emissions on the low end with that rice hole-based biochar replacing cement, and more emissions on the high end with that wood-based biochar.

But again, that's where we're more uncertain. So, from a price perspective, the central argument of this is that we can do this at a lower cost for greater emissions reduction. So, I've got in the dashed line there, that would just be the price of currently buying carbon credits to reduce that amount of emissions. We can see that that fine aggregate replacement falls right on that line. So, it's very similar in price, and that's because.

The low-cost fine aggregate. Whereas when we're replacing cement, we can see that we can reduce more emissions for cheaper. And that's kind of the key takeaway here: that this is a more effective way from a price perspective to reduce emissions than just buying those carbon credits. And the two dots for each of those colors correspond to those high certainty. And high uncertainty scenarios on the previous slide.

So, finally, what does this look like across a whole data center? And so, what we see is looking at the embodied carbon of a data center. I think these are kind of some of the important emissions as the industry is growing to think about because they are locked in at the start of that data center, whereas with electricity, you might. Be able to source cleaner electricity over time. These emissions are really upfront.

And we can see that at a high level of certainty, we can reduce about 17% of those upfront emissions with rice hole biochar. And those are mostly coming from that cement. We still have about 40% of those emissions total from steel that would need to be abated by other means. And then with a wood-based biochar, we can do about 31% of those emissions. And that's sort of at a moderate confidence level.

So, in between that high and low confidence scenario we looked at earlier. There are some challenges for this. So, efforts are currently ongoing to develop standards for the use of these materials. That's really what's going to be required. To get these in big-scale projects, to get contractors happy using them.

However, the construction industry is resistant to change. They like doing things the way that they've been doing things. And so sometimes it can be a little bit tricky to get these new materials adopted. The other thing is regional supply. Rice, in particular, is not distributed across the whole.

Country or the whole world very evenly. And so, if you have to transport that a high distance, it might then shift things a little bit towards a different feedstock, potentially using wood where that is more distributed. So, in conclusion, Biochar does have the potential to reduce embodied carbon from data centers, and that can be done at a lower cost than just purchasing. Those carbon credits. However, there is some uncertainty currently that needs to be addressed as this application continues to grow and standards are developed.

With that, I'd like to thank our funders of this work. The U.S. Department of Energy Advanced Research Projects Agency Energy funded a lot of the initial lifecycle assessment work that went into this. And Google is funding some of the ongoing LCA and performance work. And with that, I'm happy to take any questions either now or over email.

There is time for questions now, and I think hopefully you get some questions here. Ah, good. We got somebody here. Hi, thanks a lot for sharing this presentation. My question is regarding the data that you use to create these insights.

Can you comment on the reliability of the data and how evolving the data is? Yeah, so what we see is a lot of variation across the scientific literature in this area. This is one of the areas where we're really hoping to kind of take these distributions of outcomes and narrow them down, get a better idea of where we're highly confident and where things aren't going to work. Yeah, so I would say currently on the left. Side of this, we're pretty confident that will work.

It's very universally seen in the scientific literature that that results in an increase in strength. On the right side of that, might work. Might be that some of these companies and some of these research groups are doing things in a particular way that results in more beneficial outcomes that hasn't kind of been picked up more broadly. Is definitely a lot of variation in this area. Yeah.

Got it. I have a follow-up to that. Can you also comment on how receptive the hyperscalers, like in this case, probably Google, is to these insights in their future roadmap planning? Yeah, so I think fairly receptive. We do see a lot of Interest in continuing to fund these areas.

And I think because these companies are already purchasing that biochar, it's definitely an attractive option to offset some emissions and have it in their own infrastructure rather than outsource somewhere. Thanks. Any more questions then? Really quickly, let me give you the microphone because then everybody else can hear what you. Yeah, okay.

Okay, fine. Yeah, just a quick question. I assume that you've published some papers about this. Yes. Where can we find them?

If you look me up on Google Scholar, you'll find a few of them. There's also on my poster, which I believe is over that way. Some QR codes that will take you to a few of those key papers there. Thank you very much for the presentation. Very interesting.

Quick question about the impact of the biochar and the compressive strength of the sim uh concrete. Do you have any estimates of those or ranges? In terms of structural stability of the data centers made by biochar, like the how much would it impact the strength of the concrete made with biochar? Yeah, so what we see is that depends on how you make the biochar and which material it's being made. Out of.

So that rice hole biochar, and to get a little bit of the material science, there's a lot of silica in it that reacts with the calcium hydroxide in the concrete to form calcium silica hydrates. Those are well understood pathways that other supplementary cementitious materials that might be added to concrete act by. With the hard and soft wood, one of those sources of variation is that that biochar does absorb some water. And so there might be a little bit of: is that strength changing because we're changing the water to binder ratio in that concrete as that water is absorbed? Or is it changing because of something else with the biochar?

If it is just changing because we're absorbing water, We can do, we could just use less water, right? And so there's a little bit of challenges there, and I think that's where we see a lot of variation is coming out of that differences in water absorption with that biochar. Thank you. So essentially, you've got a sequestration of carbon here, yeah. But I mean, this, you know, what percent?

Of concrete and data center users compared to other factors. I mean, you know, because this could have a big impact globally, couldn't it, if you're not just focusing on data centers. Yeah, so I think that's of particular interest here because it is growing so quickly. And I think we're not quite sure maybe even in the next decade what that's going to look like. But it is still a small fraction of concrete usage, with a lot of that going to things like roads and bridges, where there's potential to store a lot more carbon in those materials.

I believe some recent roadmaps have biochart about 9% of the emissions reduction needed for the concrete industry as a whole. So it is a pretty big, big Fraction of that in some roadmaps. So, in your LCA, you talked about an LCA. Obviously, this introduces some negativity into the climate change aspects of the LCA, but not much, is it? I mean, considering still the emissions from other sources.

I mean, how do we get to this level? lovely term net zero, yeah. When you need a lot more negativity than we're getting for example in this figure, we're reducing a big chunk of those emissions of the cement so that total is about 40% steel, 60% cement. So we're reducing about half the emissions from that cement component, but we're still left with all of those emissions from the steel component. that need to be abated in some way. I mean there are initiatives around the steel with green steel uh you know using hydrogen as as a means of making the steel, yeah. So there are potentials there.

Also the other interesting one, I don't know whether any other questions is is how do how does it compare with actually wooden construction? You know, okay, concrete may be useful for the base, but uh uh Have you considered that as a possible alternative as well? How well is it how good is it compared to wood? Because that's another sequestration approach, isn't it? Yeah.

And I think in some ways they do complement each other. Because as you produce more wood, you might be left with more forestry and sawmilling residues that you then need to do something with. And this is an attractive path. Way to do that. I think it's not going to be any time soon that we're worried about not having enough concrete to put our biochar into.

Hopefully, someday we'll get there, but that's not going to be in the near future. But it's also worth noting that as we decarbonize these material production pathways into other ways, this can potentially get us to net negative. Because that negativity from the biochar will still be there, even if we're reducing less emissions from a greener cement in the future. Okay. Thanks, Seth.

Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Thanks all speaking. Thanks, everyone.
