BoW 2.1 Enhancements for New Applications

Morning. Okay, this is working. Fantastic. Today we're going to talk about bow enhancements. Bunch wires is the dotted eyes that was standardized under OCP.

So, my name is Kevin Donnelly, and I'm up here with Morgan Watley from Infineon. I'm from Ellian Corporation. Just a word about Ellian. We develop very high-performance, very low-power interconnect technologies that we license for die-to-die and chip-to-chip applications. And actually, we're in the innovation village.

If you want to see our demos of UCIE and Advanced Package and 36GB, and we have a Bow-based Phi that's at 64 gigabits per second. But I'm wearing my OCP hat today. We're going to talk about. What's going on in the world of a bunch of wires Phi? So, in the full open triplet economy that we're talking about today, a bunch of wires is one of the key areas: it's the open interface.

Bunch of Wires has its own workshop. Where we have developed and continue to develop technologies. It's partnered with a link layer workstream that is doing an upper layer logic. So the bunch wires is a physical layer PHY workstream. It's been very broadly adopted since it was initially.

Developed and within OCP many years ago. There's implementations everywhere from 65 down to three and working on two as we speak. So it's a lot of different applications broadly adopted in the industry. The bunch wire spec is I didn't mention, but it's publicly available on the OCB website, so anyone can use it. The current specification is Bo 2.0.

What the workstream has been focused on is enhancements to that spec to look at different chiplet products and categories. One of which is memory. That's been an area I've been focused on: how we can use a data dive for memory applications. Another is what we have been calling BoFlexi, which is SDR or a very cost-effective streamlined PHY. And the third is Bo for optical applications.

Different areas we're looking at. Memory, I'm very pleased to announce the Bow memory spec is the first of these that actually was published. It was just published last month, and just yesterday, Bow issued a press release about ARMS contribution and this contribution. Both of which were announced yesterday. So it's exciting to see that come to fruition.

So today we're going to talk about all three of these, but since Bo was just released, I'm going to spend some time on that first. So, you know, why is memory interesting? Will anybody working on really any? But certainly the hyperscaler and HPC AI know that memory is a huge issue. Interconnect is not keeping up with the ability to do processing.

This so-called memory wall has been one of the big limiters in Gen AIC. ASICs, and one of the key driving factors is BAMP per millimeter. A lot of people, not just myself, have talked about how Didady can be used for memory. And what we wanted to do in Bunch Wires is look at how we can extend Bo to be better for memory. So before I do that, I'll just talk briefly about inter signaling technologies.

Things like UCIE, most dyed eyes today are fixed unidirectional bump. A signal is predetermined to either be a transmitter or a receiver. That's how it's laid out physically. That's how it is, so they have to connect to each other as such. And usually it's 100% symmetric, same number of transmitters as receivers.

A bunch of wires came out with an innovation in the 2.0 spec where all of the signal bumps are transceivers, meaning the receivers in Transmitters, and they could be either one. And that's determined at initialization. That gives a lot more flexibility to architectures for how you connect things. But in the Bowtoot Auto spec, once they're initialized and configured, they operate basically the same as a fixed unidirectional from that point. Point on.

So UC, contrasting, that's UCIE and Bo 2.0. What we did in 2.1 was just take the same physical layer, but add onto it the ability to dynamically switch between transmitting and receiving, which those many of you in the audience will say, well, that's what every memory phi does. Nobody in Die to Dye land is doing this, so it's great if you want to build like a dual port SRAM where you want to have two ports going all the time. But if you're interested in building a DRAM or any kind of memory that is either going to be write or read, it can't do both at the same time. Then it's a waste of signals to dedicate transmitters and receivers when you can only use half of them.

So, taking the same spec and extending it was really the impetus and driving force behind this spec. But what we found was there's several different applications. That might use a die-to-die. Again, off-chip package memory is prevalent everywhere, but if you want to pull memory onto the package, what are things you can do? So, one of them that was highlighted initially was the idea of moving the memory controller into a memory chiplet, and that's this use case one.

In that case, the memory chiplet talks to an off-package memory, and the interface between that memory chiplet and the ASIC is really just a logic-to-logic chiplet. Today, this is already being done. You can do this with UCIE, you can do this with a bunch of wires, because it's technically a chiplet. It's an interface that's carrying memory traffic, but it's not really doing any memory operations. The second case we came up with was interfacing directly to a chiplet that's attached.

So both second and third of these have the memory controller on the ASIC as is classically done. So now you have a memory chiplet. And how you can connect to a memory triplet that has a reasonable amount of bandwidth in a very small area. And there are a number of memory applications that could use this. And the third is the sort of extreme high-performance compute end where you have a very high amount of bandwidth in a big.

Interface and you want to get the largest bandwidth per millimeter, how can a die-to-die be used for that? So the specification covers all three. I'm not going to go through the whole thing, obviously, but I just want to give a highlight. It's written as an addendum because it's much of the BO2.0 spec is. Unchanged.

And here's just an example. The BowToot Auto spec already shows the second bullet says it can be bi-directional, it can have receivers and transmitters. And it's set to either operate as either TX or RX. That's what the spec said today, still does. And in the Bow memory secures, it says.

Yes, you can do that, and you can operate them in a time-multiplex manner where you have it transmit for a while and then receive for a while, like a DDR5. So, that's an example of a change. That's the addition that helps take the Bosepec and extend it to make it more applicable to memory. Another one, a lot of you know. That all Didadyes are binary.

In other words, it's a by 8 or by 16 or by 32 or x 64. And that's great for I.O. Memory almost never wants that. There's metadata or ECC or something that you want to send along with your DQs. Bo had come up with this idea of optional.

Signals, FEC and OX, that can be used for other purposes, but we use them as ECC bits or metadata bits. And in that context, you can send 18 bits with every clock instead of 16, and that really makes it very useful for memory applications. The document that was just released goes further and describes a lot of physical implementations, how you might do this in the use case one, how things might be done in the use case two. Use case one, let's say you have a balanced write and read data, so you'll have a transmit and receive phi for those on the on your Basic, but you need additional data for command and control bandwidth, and therefore you have an asymmetric phi where you have more transmitters than receivers. You can't do that in UCIE, but you can do that in a bunch of wires, and that's what we're showing as use case one.

In contrast, a lot of applications that Majority probably have an imbalance of write and read data through a DRAM. And if you know in advance that you're gonna have less write-than-read data, then you could do something like the bottom one, where you have a same number of transmitters and receivers, and you multiplex the write data with the command and control. And then you have a full bandwidth allocated to read. And that is what we're showing for the use case number two of a direct-tached memory triplet. That is the kind of phi that could be used for that.

And the third use case, where we're going for maximum bandwidth per millimeter, I'm showing on the far right here something that's stacked up with. Four or more bow slices deep, so you get a huge amount of bandwidth on the same millimeter. This could support an HBM class memory in the beachfront needed in order to meet the application's needs. Needs. So, speaking of HBM, most of you are familiar with HBM, but on the left is a JetX standard HBM4.

The way it's built is there's a bunch of DRAM stacks that are connected through TSVs, and they're attached to what's called a buffer die or a base die. Is in the logic process. That has very, very fine pitch micro bumps, 45, 50 micron type pitch bumps, which, as Kosh was outlining earlier, you can't probe those or test those. But those can be connected to an ASIC on silicon interposer, silicon. Bridge, that kind of advanced packaging technology.

This is a very popular, extremely good example of a chiplet that's open chiplet that's made by multiple vendors and purchased by multiple consumers. So it's a successful, a very successful chiplet in the industry today. What I'm showing on the right-hand side is how this new Bow standard could be applied to take the same ASIC on the same interposer and all that, but connect it down on the package substrate to a standard package HBM. It has enough bandwidth in the small enough beachfront that it can supply all the bandwidth of an HBM4 class memory. In a standard die-to-die interface, and actually uses less power and area.

So this is something that is the Bow OCP has standardized this interface in Bow. Memories typically get standardized at a body that's called JETIC, as I said. Elion has proposed that this is a great application for a Bow-type interface at Jetix. So I think this is the kind of thing that I hope to see memories built like this in the future. And last, on the addendum, I just want to say it's a lot of work to produce a document like this.

There's a lot of people that have helped. Appreciate and acknowledge their contributions. I want to say it's available now. You can go download it. The link is here.

These will all be posted later. And you can look at designing your own memories using dotted eye interfaces, which give much higher performance and lower power than off-package memories. So we're gonna that was the uh bow part of the uh bow memory part of the bow 2.1. We're gonna switch gears now and talk about uh the bow flexi. So I'll hand it off to uh Morgan.

Hey, Hi, Dan. I'm Morgan Whateley. I'm at Infineon Technologies. I work there on chiplet architecture and part two. So, basically, figuring out how to break chips up into chiplets rather than looking at what we're doing in the kind of data center world.

So, this is more of a view from the MCU, edge computing, IoT kind of world. And one thing that we're working on as well, actually, most standards that we've Got today, don't really suit battery-powered applications, and they don't suit basically applications where you can do it monolithically, but you'd like to do it in a way where it's actually you break your die down into more of the Lego-style approaches, right? And so, with that, we've been looking. At within the OCP, looking at how to come up with an interface that's basically not as expensive from an area point of view, doesn't require advanced clocking, or maybe normally using the clocks available on the chip. Latency, where we're not, you know, we don't have to packetize everything into a large transaction layer.

And, you know, basically operating at the right voltage or the right power levels for the type of chip. So if we look at our standard Bo 2.0, you either use 8 or 16. Double data rate lanes. As we look at BoFlex, evil, you know, I don't really know how many lanes I'm going to have for each application. And in some cases, I'll put enough down on the main chiplet that we'd have.

But the subordinate chiplet may only have whatever bandwidth it needs. For its application. So, and then if we start thinking about maybe die-to-die stacking, maybe you would like to do much wider number of lanes, such as 128 to a single clock. The initial view of BoFlexi is we should do this as single-data rate rather than double-data rate. The simplicity of The single data rate from a clocking perspective solves a lot of issues.

And for the areas of IoT and edge computing, there's a lot of time where we spend where the device is in either a standby mode or a hibernate mode where it's not actually the interface. Is running, right? So bringing up links for every time you want to use them in a lot of applications just is not the same as in the data center. So with BullFlex, you were looking for no link training, no sideband required, so that you would use the link as is to initiate. So, you may initiate as a buy one and then go to the levels that you actually want to use, right?

We don't specify any frequency. You know, one issue I've seen in the Bow 2.0, people read these frequency bins as it must be two gigabigabits. Bits per second per pin, we're looking at there's no real need for any defined frequency rate. But of course, you know, when somebody's putting two chiplets together in a package, they know they're going to put these, they're going to put the chiplets. The main chiplet needs to be able to go as fast as the subordinate chiplet.

And I think that's the way that we need to think about it. The main chiplet is either on an advanced, more advanced technology than that, and that really is not an issue, right? One thing that I'd like to see is: well, okay, even if I did put a BoFi on a chiplet, and I don't need terabytes of data, I only need megabytes or even. Low gigabytes, well, there's probably a lot of pins that are unused. And with a lot of chiplets, you need some form of like maybe some clock distribution or some other wake-up signaling that may be required.

So as part of the BoFlexi, I'm driving towards Can we take the pins that are not used as part of the interface? Or you don't need to use all of them, but if there is ones available, can you use them for other functions? And we say this can be a bi-directional interface, therefore you can do lots of things. So if you had an I/O chiplet, for example, and you wanted to run like a SPI or I2C, you could basically. Transmit that directly into your main chiplet without actually having to do any encoding on the I/O chiplet per se.

So it allows the ability to be able to do going from much higher voltages, so having a chiplet to do five volts or 3.3 volt I/Os and bring it into another. Chiplet. The 50-volt ESD, as part of this, why do we really need to specify what the voltage is? I mean, I think each party can decide what voltage is required, but I think from a testing point of view, it's not that necessary in most cases. These are never going to get bonded out, so we need maybe. a C D M requirements, but not actually anything from a main ASD.

So one issue that we see if you take, you know, you go and divide a chiplet or a chip up into chiplets, it's well how am I going to deal with all of the different power modes and the different power islands I have on my devices, right? Today, the bunch of wires, while you can power it down for a short amount of time, you need to bring it back up again. We need to be able to support both active standby deep sleep and potentially some hibernate modes, right? So, one of the other issues that we see in this, okay, going for the high-density packaging, you know. 3D or 2.5D packages is extremely expensive.

So when you're looking at the edge in IOT, we're normally talking about chips that are in the, you know, maybe the five to fifteen square millimeter type range. And in those, you may want to have a separate radio or a separate analog interface. And so If you look at this from a cost point of view, you're not getting any yield benefits by going to chiplets. You're only going to get flexibility in what you can offer, and maybe flexibility from a heterogeneous point of view. So that's why we're looking at from a packaging point of view.

Bow flexules, well, we'd like something that we could work with wirebond packaging. Because that is the cheapest, it's going to be the lowest cost. We'd like the ability also to do stacking, and that could be stacking with wirebond, stacking with some copper bumps or other bump technology. So, having something that's flexible enough to basically work across all of these. Different uh technologies will enable the chiplets at the lower end of the market, right?

The you know, this data center market, it's as far as I'm concerned, uh, it's uh all super high performance, terabytes of data. But, you know, your Bluetooth radio doesn't move more than uh a couple of megabits per second, right? So We need a link that would work for that as well, right? So maybe I can so the coming up with a flexible data width, so my view is, you know, it lower speed in a lot of these cases, wider interfaces sometimes work better than uh high-speed interfaces. So if you have to If you're running on your chip at 500 megahertz, well, running, creating a clock that can do two gigabits per second or two gigahertz consumes probably a lot more power than maybe quadrupling the size of the interface.

And I think we've seen this in a lot of cases of test studies. We've looked at, right? And then, Every time you go from one voltage one voltage domain to another voltage domain, to another voltage domain, all of that stuff adds a latency and basically consumes power normally. So if you have to have different power supplies for your I/O voltages, for example, in most cases, 0.8, 0.9. Volts, 0.7 volts can be are good enough power supplies for both the chiplet and the logic to operate at.

So maybe in some cases we just like to have everything operating on the same supply going across the two different chipps, or maybe even multiple chiplets, right? So the Flexi is what we're looking to get is people to engage. In this, and figure out what sort of constraints do we want to put on this to make it work, what type of bring-up of the system. At the moment, we're planning on using just the pure sideband interface as the initialization for the BoFlexi, and then you just move on to your main band operation. Delivers us the low packaging with a die-to-die wirebond.

So analog devices did some work as part of this and said you can run up to two gigahertz or two gigabits per second basically on a standard wirebond die-to-die with a 500 micron die to die space. So it shows that you don't need to go to the very high end if for a lot of applications. If you want to go for high frequency, of course you can basically run at the multiple or even small number of lanes at high frequency if that's kind of what suits from a packaging point of view. Or go wider or basically do some stacking. Our view is that there is a lot more room from a chippet point of view to enable smaller devices with a lot of flexibility and where we'd have additional IOs to be able to provide power signaling or other types of signaling that's required to support Waco.

Up and other type of challenges. So hopefully you guys can come and join us and help us out with this endeavor. And I think it's an important one for the whole chip industry. Okay? Thanks.

Thanks, Morgan. I think this is really cool. I haven't seen anyone else in the industry talking about wire bond to wire bond connection because they're all focused on HPC with massive bandwidth. So really cool work done by ADI here. I'll switch gears to talk about optical.

Optical is a super hot topic for this conference. A lot of people, you'll see CPO and a lot of different optical connections out there. One of the questions is: not the optical side, but the die-to-die side. How do you connect to these modules? Some work in bunch wires.

I think within OCP there is some work in bunch wires to see how R5 could be applied to that application, die-to-die. But there's a lot of work within OCP. There's a whole short-reach optical interconnect workstream that I That I highly recommend you check out. They wrote a white paper earlier this year. And this topic at the OCP in APAC had a tremendous amount of interest and traction.

So we're looking at starting an OCP work stream that's specifically focused on this interconnect. Key thing in the optical interconnect world, it's different than what we were talking about earlier with a simple clock-forwarded system. Certes and optical links all have embedded clocks, but when you come back to connect to a chip through some kind of dialogue, You have to make that conversion, and the right type of interface to use can vary a lot depending upon your application and whether all your optical fibers are going to the same place or whether they're splitting out to different racks that have different clock sources and PPMs. So there's a lot of Work to be done here that I think is quite interesting. So, that was the third of the three areas of Nabo 2.1.

I wanted to wrap by mentioning the Phi metrics, which is a different work stream here. We did quite a bit of work last year, and just after this, Conference last year, I think it was a white paper, it was published. I wanted to call attention to that. One of the things we run into a lot when you're talking about, and whether it's Bow Flexi or other Bow Dyedy's, how you characterize them when you're trying to compare, if you end up compared. Comparing apples and oranges, you'll have no idea how the solutions compare to each other.

So we came up with a lot of metrics to define, for example, when you're measuring power, what is included, when you're measuring bandwidth, what is included, so that we'd get similar metrics, whether it's UCIE or a bunch of wires or some other interface. Even 112 gig XR certes. It's a comprehensive list of parameters and definitions and Excel spreadsheet that can be used for supply, say, IP vendors to give to end-chip users. It's not a comparison of who's better or what. What's better, it's strictly a technical document on metrics and definitions, but I recommend it.

Ashahab did great work on this. So, that is the end of our talk today. As a call to action, we do have a work group, it meets every Wednesday. We'd love to have more. Participation.

If interest is in the memory, we're happy to talk about it. But interest in the low-cost, the IoT, BoFlexi-related area, I think, has a lot of traction and a lot of potential applications as the world moves to chiplets outside of just massive AI systems. We meet 9 a.m. every Wednesday. It's on the website for OCE. I also included some links.

Again, the BoSpec is an addendum, so it's read as a companion to the memory addendum is read as a companion to the BoSpec. So here's links to both: the BoFi spec. Which was released two years ago, and the Bow Memory Addendum last month. And then the Google Drive is our working folder where there's just lots of documents of the work in progress for the group. So thank you very kindly for your attention.

Yeah.
