Breaking real world barriers for Open Chiplet Adoption

Okay, I'm going to talk about a lot of the real world issues and barriers that exist for this open chiplet economy that we all think and believe is coming, but we'll talk a little bit about some of the issues that I'm going to be able to do.

Actually, it exists. And it's interesting, people have really talked about just the interoperability of multi-vendors, right? So it takes a lot of work to make that happen. One of the things that they mentioned was they're taking a UCIe standard die, right? As you go to UCIe advanced, and then you go to UCIe 3D, where die are right on top of each other, that becomes extremely difficult to model and test.

But on the other hand, the UCIe 3D spec is a lot simpler, right? Because the PHY is a lot simpler. So that's one of the key mitigating factors that will exist. As a PHY vendor or starting to be a PHY vendor, the licensing cost for end customers is significant, right? Limits you from, you know, particularly on the technology node that you're using and the costs associated with it. And if you're going to do really heterogeneous integration, that means that you don't just buy one PHY, you've got to have a PHY for each node that you're actually going to be integrating, right? So it's something people don't talk about it, but I think it is a barrier to not just adoption at the high end, but certainly at the low end, and also for innovation, right? For universities and startups, it's a huge barrier to engage.

The packaging costs are pretty high. Just getting an idea of what the packaging costs really are is actually quite difficult if you're not a hyperscaler or a large company. And packaging has evolved from everybody doing the same packaging to every packaging vendor having its own IP and technology, right? So it's quite challenging to build a PHY that works across a range of technologies. And as some of you probably know, the foundries are also into the packaging business, and one foundry in particular dominates that. So they also kind of have a closed ecosystem now, right? So if you want to do a die from Foundry G and go to Foundry T and put them together, it might be difficult to do that. It's not as straightforward as one would think.

So we've talked about interoperability. But the other key thing is: when you choose your PHY, you have to choose: is it advanced? Is it standard? Is it 3D? So your entire system, and you're projecting that two years down the road. So if you choose the wrong approach, the wrong vendor, you may have serious problems. You have a product that won't work or a product that misses the market. So I think this is one of the key things. Packaging and the technology you use is actually critical to a product success, which wasn't really the case in the old days.

And I think the other thing is that there's a lot of innovation going on in packaging and in the standards. Standards are evolving, how you manage the PHYs. So if you design something and you don't have the latest features, what is the market window for that? It takes you a couple of years to design something, the standard has changed. So if you look at it from a business standpoint, it's quite challenging to have something that works. Close the ecosystem, everything works great, right? Because you have some control. But trying to build this open chiplet economy, it is not as straightforward as people make out on the slides.

The other thing is the availability of open source chiplets is challenging because of these reasons, right? You really can't go and buy a chiplet. A number of companies have their chiplets on chiplet marketplace and other places, but when you really start looking at them, they're quite challenging. They may not even match the latest standards. So, is that really a reusable chiplet, right? So, I think, and then the same. The hidden part of this is how do you understand known good die? Who guarantees the yield? We'll touch a little bit on that, but that again is a barrier of adoption. When they really start delving into this, it's not as easy as you think. So, yes, there's a big future coming up, but there is, but there are.

We should have used our own laptops. I'll tell OCP next time. Okay, so I want to initially talk about the effort that OCP is doing, which I think is pretty interesting. One of the issues is: how do you tie multiple chiplets together. So there is a virtual prototyping group that's being set up, which is transitioning out of the business group. I think that's a fair way to say it. There is a marketplace that's being set up where, as people develop chiplets, we can start putting them there. The customers will know what's available. And it's online. And you can just go list your chiplets there.

There is an open systems group, which is really looking at chiplets from a management level. What happens when chiplets need to power up? How do you handle testability? How do you handle security, which is a big issue when you're looking at chiplets? And how do you just manage what happens when a chiplet goes bad, right? So if you have a redundant system. So there's all sorts of things from a management standpoint that originally are not part of the standards, right? So different groups are addressing these. There are also industry ecosystems like ARM has got one, others have got one. There may be others coming up, right? So, in terms of how do you really ensure that chiplets, when you buy them and put them together, will actually work together. So, I think this is all within OCP, and we're open in that group, right? So, we will be looking at the ARM approach and other approaches. And we'll invite people to try and address this because it's an industry-wide issue.

Security is another one. There are a lot of security vendors. OCP has been working and has worked with Caliptra on the Caliptra standard, which is a hyperscaler standard. We think that that's a good way to go for potentially looking at chiplets as well. So that's something that I think there will be some developments on as we move along. And in that, I'm speaking as YorChip, right? So we're looking at Caliptra to secure some chiplets.

And then the final thing. I think people know this, that you have to probe die to know that they're good. And the industry's been doing that for 40, 50 years. The moment you go to advanced packaging and certainly 3D packaging, probe just doesn't work. So you really can't probe die. If you're going to sell die, you need to be able to stress the die and then test the die again. So, we really see some of this BIST work that's going on. So, you really need to have ways of testing the die and making sure that they're reliable before you can offer them for sale. So, I think this is something that the industry is really lacking on at the moment, how are these die stressed? How are they tested? And it is a real barrier to real adoption when you really start looking at customers like automotive or industrial. They want to make sure that the die is not just working, but it will last 10 years or five years of operation or whatever their specs are. And a cost of failure is a real problem, right? So that's something that, again, I think the industry is not handling as well as maybe it should.

YorChip, I don't want to spend too much time on this, but we are working on a more interoperable PHY, which is a reflection of what UCIe 3D is. But applying it in a wider way. So that's kind of our differentiation as a company. And we're focused on primarily edge AI, so power is critical, latency is critical for real-time applications, cost is very, very important, being able to test is critical. So we're basically making a UCIe product, but focusing on one that we consider is really simple from an interop standpoint. And if you don't need the maximum bandwidth per millimeter, this is actually a pretty interesting way to go.

And here are some key things that, you know, we're still very, very early on, and there are a lot of people who don't even believe that there ever really will be an open chiplet market, right? So I think there is a need for packaging vendors and test vendors and the PHY vendors to really enable an ecosystem, make it much easier for people to develop and design, right? And it's a hard conversation to have because everybody's still very closed. I think the golden die guys are a case of that, right? Because one vendor doesn't want the other vendor seeing it. How do you test it? If you find that you're not as good as the other guy, the other vendor is going to trump that up, right? It's a big problem in the industry, right? So, this is one of the big challenges: people don't want to, you know, they'll give you a data sheet, but that's under NDA, right? So, it's really difficult to really enable this.

So, I think this is not an easy answer, but maybe OCP can help. I mean, I think they did something with measuring PHYs and performance and specs, right? So, at least they got somewhere. I'm not sure it's actually had any traction, but I think the idea is good. We now translate that to a broader effort, right? How can we make developing chiplets easier? So I think this is a generic barrier that I don't think we'll solve today, but I think this is something to highlight. And I also think that you need to, over time, develop, because a lot of the barriers are business-based, right? So, how can you make it not just from one vendor, but from a range of vendors to say, hey, if you want to do an MPW, just like TSMC does, if you want to do an MPW run, here's a low-cost way of getting that done. Same with packaging, right? Packaging is no longer an afterthought. You really need to plan for it. And how do you put your different die together? When will those die be available? Will you have capacity at the packaging vendor? I mean, there's a lot of things to consider when you really want to do this. And so I think this is a real level of barriers as opposed to just showing a bunch of slides. I think this is the whole point of this presentation.

And really, from a business standpoint, if you want to use PHYs across a range of nodes, maybe there should be a way for startups or smaller companies to actually take advantage of that, have a multi-licensed kind of approach, which doesn't really exist because the leading edge vendors are so focused on hyperscaler, they don't even have a PHY for 28 nanometer or 40 nanometer or 22 nanometer. And in the real world, those are still popular nodes. And people are now starting to go to 12 and 7 in a lot of edge applications. It's not just a race to 2 and 1, whatever the latest is.

And then the final one is: from our standpoint, security is important for the sort of customers that we're dealing with. So, having that root of trust and ways to make sure that your die, sorry, your packaged die in a single package are tamper-proof. How can you do that without buying and paying millions of dollars for security? This is something we're trying to do because Caliptra is open source, and we're looking at using that or leveraging that. And finally, the PHY that we're developing, we are going to be open sourcing that for use by smaller companies, startups, whatever, right? And when we've talked to, and I've spent some time in the open source community, a lot of the designs are in older nodes like 130, 180, which are not die-friendly. Eventually, I think it will come down to some of the more medium-range nodes. Typically, there is no funding, right? Because this is university or a small startup. They're wirebonding a lot of stuff, right? You know, they just wire bond the die and test it for performance and so on. So how can they leverage chiplets? But we think that as an industry, this is required.

So our thinking right now is that we will enable something that will interface to our device, but our device will only run up to 0.8 volts because it's more of a standardized. And most of the older nodes will need to run at 1.2, 1.8 is even 1.2 is considered low. Right? Yeah. So I think that this is something that we're doing, is planning on doing with OCP. That once our PHY is released, we will do an open source version of that to enable adoption.

I got two minutes. A call to action. I think, is it really important? What can you do? There's a whole range of things to be involved with. Business, systems, test, packaging. And I think that there needs to be more of when people are talking about trying to solve real-world problems as opposed to just I've got a PHY and it's the latest and it's the greatest and you don't talk about packaging, you don't talk about availability, you don't talk about how do people can really adopt it, right? Outside of the top 10 customers, right? So, this is kind of the message that if we want this to be a more universal thing, then I think that somehow this has to happen. Okay, I'm done. Any questions?

Okay. Hi Sanjeev. I have a question regarding the support remote soft speaker. Hello. Yeah. So you mentioned that you want to apply Caliptra to solve the challenge of chiplet security. The Caliptra is a root-of-trust subsystem, right? How do you want to use Caliptra to solve chiplet security? Yeah, it's getting into some area that I don't want to talk about. But basically, our plan is to have, let's say, a security management chiplet that would be common for customers, right? And that's easier to validate and to do attestation. So maybe on one side you have, let's say, some memory interface that people are using, like Flash or whatever else. You have the security blocks in there, plus some management. And I think there is some effort on the management side with different groups. So, our thinking is that we would have a management and security chiplet that they could just buy. Because the last thing that a lot of designers are thinking about is security, right? So, and then how do you now interface to that without getting into how we're gonna do it, right? You need to secure the entire set of packages. It's not a direct application of Caliptra, because Caliptra provides a baseline root of trust security, right, for attestation and storing measurements. You still have to build stuff on top of that. Yeah. And you have to tie it into and make it chiplet specific. So that's what I'm saying. I think that some of this ecosystem work is where some of that will come on, right? Which is, okay, you need security. How is it going to work? How do you know? There's a lot of issues with chiplets, right? If you've got multiple chiplets and you're packetizing the information, you've got to how do you address the data? How do you route the data? I mean it's a different source system. Right. Thank you. Thank you again.
