Deconstructing the Storage Software Stack from Legacy Silos to AI Scale Architecture

Welcome to Deconstructing the Storage Software Stack from Legacy Silos to AI at Scale, a webinar presented by the SNIA Data Storage and Networking Forum. My name is Luis Freeman.
And I'll be your host and moderator for today's webinar. I'm pleased to introduce to you to our expert speakers. Rohan Mera is a member of Technical Staff, Systems Performance Architect at Micron Technology, and Jayanti Ramakalanjijam, a software engineering leader at Celestica.
Before we get into the content, I wanted to provide a quick overview of the SNIA community. SNIA is an industry organization that develops global standards and delivers education on all technologies related to data. SNIA is comprised of two hundred industry leading organizations,
2,000 active contributing members, and 50,000 participating IT and users and technologists worldwide. The SNIA Data Storage and Networking Community, also known as DSN Community, is an active group within SNIA that provides vendors.
Neutral education and insights for applying network storage standards and associated technologies to a broad spectrum of end-to-end solutions. Some logistics for today. The slides for this session are available under the attachment tab at the bottom of your conversation.
If you want to ask a question during the presentation, you can do so by selecting the Ask Question option and entering your question there. All questions asked during the webinar will be answered either live or as part of a question and answer blog post.
That we try to post no more than two weeks after the webinar. Please take the time to rate the session and ideally leave a comment. Even if you need to leave early for some reason, we take your feedback very seriously because we greatly value your time and want to make sure you are getting the
Most out of each session as possible. If you want to interact with people like the presenters of this session and other industry professionals, consider joining SNIA and the DSM community. We meet every week on Thursdays at 10 a.m. Eastern.
Finally, I want to call your attention to the SNIA legal notice. This provides SNIA copyright notice regarding the use of the material. SNIA is not providing any legal advice and there are no warranties expressed or implied. So, if you want to reference these materials, please do.
So, at your own risk. Some disclaimers. For the purpose of this webinar, the term software encompasses both software and non-SSD firmware. The stacks shown on this deck are simplified representations, real-world implementations in
Specific technical nuances. This webinar focuses on the software aspects. Details for the hardware implementations are not discussed. Here is today's agenda. We will start discussing the various layers.
Of storage stack with a brief description of the functionality of each layer. We will then continue with a quick recap of what glues all the software storage technologies together: the protocols and interconnects. Our third subject will discuss the importance of virtualization.
and where does the storage stack gets virtualized. Next, we will talk about how the virtualization logic fits the storage subsystem and software stack. We will then talk about the architectural guidelines. And last, we will close with a sneak peek at how AI storage is being applied.
Before we start with the webinar, we would like to have a quick poll. How familiar are you with this topic? I am new to this. I am working with the storage architecture.
But looking forward to learning more, or I live with this day and night. If you can give us a few seconds of your time and reply to the poll.
And let's see.
Um all right, we're seeing s responses coming. So great, looks like we have about close to half and half between uh being new at this and uh people with some familiarity. Oh, it's changing now. Sixty four percent is uh
Is familiar with the subject to some extent. And about 35% is new. And we, oh, we have 5% since they do this all day long, day and night.
All right. I think we're getting close to the closing on the poll. Yeah, it just ended. And so we got 41% is new at this. 50% is working.
But looking forward to learning more. And 8% is some people that are doing this day and night. All right, so let's go ahead and start with the webinar. Jayanti. Yeah, thanks. Thanks, Loise, for the warm introduction and for setting the stage.
Hello everyone. Whether it's morning, afternoon or evening, wherever you are, it's a privilege to have such a diverse global group with us today. We are taking a deep dive into storage software stack. We have structured this journey in a beautiful way, starting with the basics and scaling up to the most advanced topics.
We have a lot of ground to cover in the next 50 minutes. We've designed this presentation deck to be self-navigating. It's packed with a lot of keywords, webinars, and reference links for diving deep into each topic. Please grab the download after the session to explore those nuances at your own pace. For now, let's go.
Let's get started. To kick things off, let's look at the hello world of data infrastructure. The simplified storage stack model, just like the seven-layer OSI model, revolutionized networking.
We can visualize storage through a similar seven-layer architecture that bridges the raw hardware to the end-user application. At the very base, we have the physical foundation, which consists of the drives, cables, transceivers, etc. Moving up to layer two, we have the device drivers and firmware. This is the translated layer that.
Speaks the language of the hardware and binds it to the OS layered above it. Layer 3, which is the operating system layer, provides a standard interface that marks the complexity of the hardware from everything above it. At layer 4, the logical volume manager consolidates and pulls the raw storage space in.
Into one usable volume. However, the applications at the top cannot simply dump data into these large folds because different data types require different handling. So that's where layer 5 and 6 come in. These layers manage the specific requirements.
Of how data is read, written, and stored, ensuring the performance, security, and integrity of the data are never compromised. Finally, at layer 7, we reach the application. Because of the heavy lifting done by the lawyers below, the application can seamlessly interact with the data without ever needing.
Needing to know the specifics of particular physical drives. Now let's zoom in the stack a bit more and see how it looks like in a standalone server like a Linux host.
What is the goal of this stack? It's a journey of abstraction from the bottom layer to the top layer, taking raw, messy and complex hardware infrastructure at the bottom and turning it into a clean, user service for the application at the top, coupled with many value adding data services.
The physical is the heavy metal layer consisting of hard disk drive, source drives, NVMe, SST drives. The drivers and firmware layer uses the compatible protocols like NVMe, PCIe, SATA, SOUS, and allow the machine to talk to the physical media. And this is where the raw layer.
Latency and physical throughput are determined. As we discussed, layer 3 and layer 4 make sure that the application doesn't need to see the multiple different small physical drives at layer 1. They pool the available storage capacity in different drives into one massive, resilient.
Virtual bucket of storage. Here I'd like to emphasize on one point: the importance of layer 5 and 6. The data being written is not just the raw data, it's not just a sequence of bytes. It can be in any format having varying characteristics and having
Varying performance requirements. The data format could be in file, object, or block format. Layer 5 provides these specific flavors to the higher layers. And layer 6 exposes the system calls and APIs like POSIX and REST so that the application.
Applications can use standard interfaces to access the storage. The top layer, which is the application layer, is where the user lives. Applications could be an end-user application, or an enterprise application like a database or web server, or an infrastructure application like a VM hypervisor.
By following this seven-layer model, it is ensured that the storage is scalable, secure, and most importantly, abstracted away from the complexity of the hardware.
Now, let's see what are storage networking protocols and interconnects. When storage extends beyond a single host, networking interconnects and protocols provide the necessary intelligence and support for the same. As we shift from the standalone host to distributed storage networks,
Networks, the complexity grows. Managing storage across multiple roads requires a higher level of intelligence, which is where the specialized protocols and networking interconnects become very essential. Standardization is the key, but one size doesn't fit all. That's the reason we have.
Different permutation and combination in this case. The choice of protocol and interconnects may vary based on the storage format we discussed earlier, block, file, or object, or based on whether the storage is attached locally or it is accessed remotely.
For example, for block storage, we may use high-performance protocol combinations like fiber channel, iSCSI, NVMe, or NVMe or Fabric. In the case of file storage, we might use SMB or NFS for shared access. In the case of object storage, we may be using.
APIs. The combination of protocols may also vary whether storage is local or remote. For local storage, generally PCIe and source links are used. However, for remote access, we can leverage the robust fabrics like fiber channel, Ethernet.
InfiniBand, Omnipath, RUA-link, ultra-accelerator link connectivity. Finally, we are also seeing a convergence of storage and memory. Protocols like Compute Express Link and RDMA remote direct memory access allow us to expand the CPU system run.
By seamlessly sharing the memory with attached devices, including the GPUs, high-speed storage, dedicated memory expansion cards. Now, let's see the types of data. We can
Typically, we classify the data into four types or four tiers: cold, warm, hot, and mission-critical, based on two important parameters: based on the access frequency and business priority or the business value of the data to the application. The example.
For cold data, can be an archived data or a data we maintain for long-term compliance that are rarely touched. The access frequency is low, the priority is also low to the application. The example for the warm data could be information like quarterly reports.
Which is accessed occasionally but not needed instantly. The example for hot data could be daily customer transaction data that require fast and reliable access. Mission-critical data is a heartbeat of the business. Example will be the stock market data or
Banking system transaction where latency and downtime is unacceptable. But why does this matter for our webinar? Because the data temperature decides the infrastructure for the data.
For example, we need to choose the right storage media, whether to use SSTs or HTTs or whether to use InfiniBand or Ethernet or to use network file system or REST interfaces based on what type of data you are going to access or write.
Now, let's move into the second topic, the third topic in the agenda: virtualization. Up to this point, we have explored how protocols and interconnects provide the scalability.
And flexibility needed for modern networks. But we must ask ourselves: is a robust network alone enough to satisfy the relentless demands of HPC and AA workloads? The short answer is no. These high-performance applications.
Require more than just a fast pipe. They demand extreme performance consistency, automated resilience against hardware and networking failures, and the agility to provision resources instantly as workloads fluctuate. This is where the storage virtualization comes into play.
Play. When we talk about virtualization in this context, we are talking about moving the brain of the operation into the software. This is achieved through a software-defined storage solution. Advancement in STS and the high-speed interconnects and protocols have fundamentally.
Change the game by decentralizing the storage functions. When we solve the performance bottleneck, the physical location of the data becomes transparent to the application. It simply doesn't matter where the data sits.
Within the SDS framework, we can look at virtualization in two different dimensions. The first one is the implementation based virtualization, where the intelligence can be in the host or in the network or in the storage array.
Also called the controller. The second dimension is access-based, which defines how the application consumes it, whether as a blog format, or file format or object format. So let's look at this virtualization type one by one.
So, when we talk about implementation-based virtualization, we saw that there are three subtypes: host level, network level, and controller level. In the case of host-level virtualization, the hypervisor, the STS software, and replications all
Run on the same server, and we get the fastest possible response. Since it gives better response, it's also called lowest latency domain. And in the case of network-level virtualization, a dedicated appliance in the SAN environment is acting as.
A smart bridge between the host and the backend storage network. In the controller-level virtualization, it's a more traditional approach where the intelligence is baked into the storage controller in the storage array itself. We'll see some more details of these three subtypes in the next slides.
So we saw host-level virtualization where the software runs within the same host server. There are some key characteristics, for example, resource usage. The software consumes these CPU and members.
Memory cycles from the same machine, and it's a premium we are paying for getting high performance. And when it comes to management, it is decentralized. Each host manages its own stack, which is what gives this architecture its incredible scalability.
And as we saw, it provides very less latency. And because of this, the use case where this virtualization is used is mostly the hyper-converged infrastructure and modern cloud-native storage or the containerized storage.
It's a go-to choice when speed and leanness scaling are the priorities. Now, let's see the controller level virtualization. In the case of controller-level virtualization, as I mentioned.
It's also called array-based virtualization. In this model, the intelligence sits within the storage controller itself. What makes this powerful is its ability to act as a manager of managers. It doesn't just manage its own internal disk in that particular rack. It can actually
Reach out and pull capacity from other connector arrays, even those from different vendors, and present them as one unified high-performance volume to all the servers. There are some characteristics similar to host virtualization.
As we saw, it provides centralized pooling. And it is vendor-agnostic because we can mix old hardware with the new ones, vendor A with vendor B, without the application ever knowing the difference. And it can provide advanced services like auto-tiering when the temperature of the data changes.
It can move from HDDs, hard disk drive to SSDs, or SSDs to tape drive. So, depending upon the temperature, and it abstracts the complexity of all the underlying hardware. This kind of virtualization is a backbone for the enterprise.
In large scale data centers where high availability is non-negotiable, controlled level virtualization provides the stability and performance consistency that many applications demand. It allows us to scale up the capacity without adding the complexity to the host server.
If the host level virtualization what we saw is about low late lowest latency, controller level virtualization is all about management control, having the management control and enterprise grade resilience.
Now let's see the third type, which is the network level virtualization. This is at the center of our architecture. This is most prevalent model in the industry. Here, the intelligence resides in a dedicated appliance, as we saw.
And its position between the servers and storage. We can also say between the initiators and targets. This device acts as a traffic controller. It intercepts and redirects I/O requests to the right storage device. Within this model, we typically see two approaches: symmetric virtualization.
And asymmetric virtualization. In the case of symmetric, the appliance sits directly in the data path and handling every bit of data that moves across. In the case of asymmetric, the appliance manages the directions but not the actual data. Data transfer takes place between the host.
And the storage medium directly. The key characteristics we can say: thin provisioning where the storage capacity need not be allocated immediately. Storage can be given to the application when the first byte of.
Data is written. And it helps in taking snapshot clones, remote replication, disaster recovery, since it is in the middle and it connects wider setup servers and wider backend storage networks. It also helps in auto-tiering.
Of this fabric-weight management, it's the ideal choice for high-performance workloads like A and machine learning applications. Now, let's see the second dimension of virtualization. So far, we saw the implementation-based virtualization.
And three of subtypes. So, this is a second dimension: the access-based virtualization. This is all about the interface between the application and the storage. Depending upon the workload, data is presented in one of the three formats: file, object, and block. In the case of file,
Storage, it's like a neat file cabinet. It uses hierarchical structures with folders and files at multiple levels. The Windows similar to the Windows Explorer we are familiar with. And protocols like network file system and server message block are used to access the storage.
And in the case of object storage, it's a massive flat warehouse kind of storage. Instead of hierarchy, every piece of data is an object bundled with rich metadata and a unique identifier, and it's accessed via RESTful APIs. Since it's flat, it offers.
Massive scalability and this is useful to store unstructured data, cloud backups, and media streaming like Netflix. And the third type: block storage. Here, the application treats the storage like a local hard drive, writing to raw fixed.
Blocks via fiber channel or iSCSI. Because there is no file system overhead between the application and the data, this is a preferred choice for mission-critical databases, virtual machines, and HPC workloads. The takeaway from this virtualization is that.
It perfectly matches the available storage volume with the application's specific language and performance needs. And one thing we shall keep in mind that all these virtualizations are not mutually exclusive. They can coexist with one another, stacked one on top of another.
To provide seamless experience to the end user application. And with this, my portion of the presentation is getting over. After the poll, Rohan will take over. Thank you. So we have a a second poll question.
So, if you would like, please to submit your answer. Is this presentation meeting your expectations so far? So, let's see what we are getting as response. By the way, we will fix the
The text on the previous chart. There was some orphan text that was incorrectly on that chart, so we'll fix it and post the updated presentation. All right, so answers are starting to come. So we got.
So far, 50-50 between yes and somewhat. So let's see how that evolves. All right, 62% yes, down to 33% for somewhat. We have one person saying that it's not meeting.
Expectations. Okay. Yeah, this feedback is very important to us because it allow allow us to improve. So, yeah, so your answers are very appreciated.
All right, it looks like the poll has ended. And so, yeah, so 60% say yes, 36% somewhat, 2% no. So, with this, let's continue with the presentation. Rohan.
Thanks, Luis. Thanks, Janthe, for a great primer on the virtualization techniques. Up to this point, we've talked about layers, protocols, access models, and virtualization techniques in isolation. From here on,
Try to put everything together into a coherent storage stack and more importantly, try to show how architects should reason about trade-offs rather than just learning these standalone technologies in isolation and trying to memorize them. So, storage starts with a physical.
Reality. So there will be a typical storage system will be having three main nodes. There will be a back-end storage node, which would be the target. There would be an intermediary storage node, which typically runs the software-defined storage stack. It could be a controller or an intelligent switch node.
And then there is the initiator or the host server, which is typically your compute server hosting and running the applications on things like CPUs or GPUs. Most storage requirements at this node are for a running operating system, so it will typically have OS disks and options.
Sometimes a few fast high-end rules disks for local caching. We won't be going into those details in this presentation and we'll focus mostly on the first two. So let's start with the backend storage node, which is the fundamental unit of a data center that is the storage enclosure. Every storage system, no matter how virtual.
Or abstracted will ultimately start here, which is the physical media inside an enclosure. Whether we are talking about JBots for traditional disks or JBOS for high-speed flash, these units are highly versatile, sometimes even mixing both the media type.
To balance cost and performance. This layer is highly optimized for making the most out of the physics of the media. So things like choosing PCIe over SCSI, for SSD versus HDD, and latency versus endurance become your primary concerns. The supporting hardware inside
These storage enclosures like power supply unit, the PSUs, fans, thermal management units, et cetera, are typically managed by SES, so SCSI enclosure services, or BMC, a baseboard management controller, on a dedicated processor with out of band reliability.
The out-of-band IPs ensure that you have admin access to the server, even if the server software crashes and renders it inaccessible over the network. In modern systems, custom ASICs and chips like DPUs, SmartNICs, and other accelerators also sit inside these.
Enclosures to provide scaling and offload capabilities for routine services, routine processes, sometimes even virtualization techniques. These techniques can be extended out over fabric, eventually aggregating multiple enclosures into a massive storage array and performing many.
Data-related functionalities closer to the physical medium. This is actually what powers most of the world's cloud providers today. There's an important takeaway here that no virtualization logic lives here. This layer exposes just the raw capabilities, the things like capacity.
Bandwidth, latency, but does not decide how the data is actually consumed. If you're an architect, the key takeaway here would be you cannot virtualize your way out of poor physical choices. If you care about performance, you would want to go for the best of the product.
Then comes the first major virtualization boundary, which is the storage controller. This intermediary layer, also sometimes known as the metadata layer or the storage controller layer, is where the virtualization starts becoming first class. This is the node where a large chunk
Of virtualization software intelligent exists. This layer is responsible for converting your raw drives into a logical and location agnostic pool. So making features like RAID, striping methods, erasure encoding, caching, deduplication, compression.
Tiering, all of these are available. These are basically a bunch of indirection and redirection techniques that a distributed storage system has to have. Note the subtle differences here for each method. For example, RAID provides redundancy within the local storage domain, whereas
Erasure coding provides data resiliency across distributed domains. Depending on your scale, utilization, what are the needs of your customer applications, you might need to support at least one, and in most cases, both of these methods. The front-end layer in here is the application-facing interface.
Providing network path and reliable access services to the host servers or the applications running on the host servers. Its most important job is to provide multi-path access control with security features. So, doing things like authentication and authorization once an application is authenticated.
And authorized. It then starts trying to help better understand the request coming from various applications across various API interfaces and various protocols from various initiators. So, this is where things start to become distributed. It tries to distill their I/O data.
Requirements. And so, as you keep scaling in terms of requests and capacity and your distributed storage domains, your goals will eventually shift from doing just simple authentication and authorization to trying to maintain seamless connectivity with lowest latency and highest availability. The background.
Facing layer is the one that tries to orchestrate the actual data-related services. So the distal, the data I/O requests that came from the front-end layer are converted into storage-specific semantics at this layer so that it can speak the language of the drives and perform the media-specific operations.
Operations like discovery, health monitoring, data protection services, data compression, data retrieval. So basically, actual read and write IOs. The main goal here is to organize the data safely and securely with certain guarantees against anything and everything that can go.
Wrong while providing the best performance, resiliency, efficiency, and longevity. Architecturally speaking, the front-end speaks the protocols and makes the access mechanisms available, so, like block, file, or storage. The back-end speaks to the media.
You have NVMe commands and SSD behavior and where management happening at the back end layer. You may notice that so many software features and functionalities sitting inside, especially inside the front-end layer, would invariably introduce some latency and computational lag.
So this is where the trade offs come into play in designing large scale distributed systems. Every added feature will trade raw latency with some form of centralized control, predictability and quality of service in whatever service that you are providing.
So, this is a very dense and maybe even jarring-looking alphabet soup of the host software stack. I'll try to simplify it a little bit. Let's start with the observation that each OSI layer of the protocol stack that we just learned at the beginning of the presentation.
Has the capability to get involved in a wide breadth of solutions. So if you read the stack horizontally from the bottom, it starts with the bottom block provides the most common transport medium.
The top, the upper block provides the storage-specific functionalities. If you read from the upper block, in the upper block, if we'll go from left to right, the leftmost stack supports file storage, the rightmost stack supports block storage, and the main storage storage storage storage.
Little block here, it's supposed to object storage. What this basically shows is that a host or a compute server is not bound to a single storage personality or single storage service. The same host can do, for example, block storage via NVMe or SCSI, it can try to do files.
Storage via NFS or SMB, it can do object storage via HTTP APIs or gRPC or any other mechanism. It really gives the host the flexibility to access the underlying storage. Another way to look at it together would be if you start from bottom again, you have your physical hardware, so any.
Drives or SaaS or SATA drives, you'll have your device drivers sitting on top of those, which will enable the operating system and its IO scheduler and any device mapper that exists inside your operating system to make the devices visible and accessible at that layer. There might be a
An optional multipath layer sitting just above that in operating system. And then you will have your indirection logic that will provide services like RAID or logical volume management. And then on top of that, you will have the actual access-based virtualization.
Techniques, so file, object, or block storage interfaces. And then finally, the host will be accessing all of these services using some API calls or system calls. Every implementation-based virtualization technique that we have discussed so far, the host, network, or controller.
In that order, ultimately plugs into one of these layers. So, host-level virtualization would typically live at the LVM or the RAID layer or above. Network and controller ones would plug in just around the OSBLOP layer. This is the topology and fit part of the journey.
you should be able to now see like where kind of each technique fits into the protocol stack. The key takeaway here is that the access type is the one that determines the protocol path, and that's it. You still don't have any control of what the underlying physical storage media.
And so, your access type is the one that's determining your virtualization choices. So, where your implementation-based virtualization sits will start becoming important as well. Again, this is again the summary of what.
Have discussed so far. So, in a simple, simplified way, the bullet points would be: if you're focusing on implementation-based techniques, as you go from host virtualization to network to controller, you're moving away from the CPU, and as you're
Going from blocks to file or object in the access-based virtualization techniques, you are moving from low-level to high-level semantics of how you're actually accessing the storage media. The host is where the application meets this abstraction.
It decouples the application from the storage implementation details underneath. So, I wanted to just give you a brief primer on the global namespaces. So, we learned that storage was
Virtualization can work along two dimensions. So, how the data is accessed and where the virtualization is implemented in the stack. So, the natural question is: to an application, what would this look like? Especially if they both start trying to converge at the host. So, if you're doing, you're trying to make everything available to the host.
Host, which is where the application lives, and what would the application see? The answer is the global namespace. So the global namespace or GNS is a unifying abstraction that sits above all of these techniques. The application sees exactly one thing, which is a single unified mount.
Mount point for your underlying storage drive. It might not even be a single drive, but that's what an application would see: a single mount point. It doesn't know, and more importantly, does not need to know whether the data it is reading lives in a local NVMe SSD or a remote flash array.
Or some object storage across a network. And this directly tracks to what we began this presentation with regarding that when it comes to virtualizing storage resources, if you meet the performance requirements, then the actual physical location of the data starts to become
Transparent to the application. And GNS is the mechanism that makes that transparency real. Also, this transparency is not static. So data can move between these tiers, say from local NVMe storage to the cold object storage, as the data goes from being hot to cold.
Without the application ever changing its access paths, the GNS metadata layer will be the one that handles all the routing and redirection silently. For those of you building or evaluating software-defined storage solutions, GNS is the feature that will tell you whether your system is truly virtualized or abstracted. True virtualization.
By two virtualization, I mean that the namespace would survive any changes in the hardware access path or any changes in the topology. So, node failures, migrations, scale-out, you're staging things from away from hot to cold. The client should not see, the operation should not see any disruption.
So, think of GNS as an outcome of the two virtualization techniques getting combined rather than just some new third type of virtualization technique. I think that's the correct way to go.
Section: I'm just going to try to give my opinion on some key architectural guidelines that you want to keep in mind when trying to design a storage infrastructure. Again, these are guidelines, these are not some hard-coded rules, and these heuristics might change in the future. Now, I'm going to start with.
My opinion on the three lanes that I kind of divided based on performance. So, if performance is your primary concern and you want to see the best, you want to get the best performance, like lane one gives you kernel bypass using methods like.
RDMA or PCIE, NVMe or Fabric, SRIOV. So these are a bunch of technologies that will get you the lowest latency path, but these are also very complex to implement. You will have to hire software engineers or developers that can do all of these techniques and maintain that software stack for you.
Lane two is where you can use the TCP/IP stack that's present in the operating system. You can plug it with storage protocols like iSCSI or NVMe or TCP. This is still fast, except these techniques usually have higher tail latencies and are.
Sometimes lossy when you're trying to use reliable transport protocols like TCP. So, if your scale is a concern and the tail latencies in that higher scale is your concern, then this might not be the lane for you. And the final is the lane 3, which is the slowest one.
You just have everything available in the user space, in your host, or to the application. Application tries to access all the data using APIs. So just make one call, and you should expect your data. So, all the processing for the data after you get your data also should happen in your user space. So, serialization.
And metadata overhead would become your concerns. This will again introduce more latency. But this lane is best useful for sharing and scale. So if you have things that you're sharing at the application layer with more customers or other applications, then this is the best.
Layer to do for. The key nuance here is that two systems might use the same protocol. So performance can still vary depending on where the virtualization is implemented. So the same protocol does not mean the same performance. And that's the key takeaway here. You might be using NVMeo referrals.
Over fabrics, but if you're not leveraging any kernel bypass technologies, so like NVMe or RDMA, then your performance will greatly vary between what you can get from lane one and lane two. This is a table that
Tries to explain what we have learned today and where it is typically implemented. So the summary here is: you have three virtualization-based techniques for three techniques for implementation-based virtualization and three for access. So if you combine them, you would have nine. You'll see that three of these.
Combinations are missing from the table. Those are the three options that are the most complex and the least implemented in production at scale today, because they involve things like gateways, translation layers, and typically are the slowest and have the lowest hanging fruit.
So, the grounding principle here is that the three implementation-based and three access-based techniques are orthogonal. So, you can combine them, but you really want to stick to the six techniques that are here because they are not only the most popular and the most first-class.
In production, but they are actually actively used at various stages of the AI workloads. So anything to do with block storage is highly used during inference. Anything to do with files and objects, so host plus file, host plus object, is heavily used in training.
Again, I'm going further, distilling down further into what the key takeaways and summary is going to be for if you are architecting the storage system. Probably these are the four most important points of this entire presentation that.
Latency is minimized when your virtualization boundary sits closest to the CPU, and your protocol sits closest to the interconnect. So, typically, your PCIe is the most commonly used interconnect these days. The host level, so it's a host level.
Virtualization plus block storage plus NVMe. This is the fastest mechanism we know so far. If your workload needs sub-millisecond latency consistently, then this is your option. Network-level virtualization will add hops, but will also add flexibility. So you will have fabric-wide management to give you.
Multi-tenant pooling. It might even allow you to become vendor independent. You could talk to multiple storage vendors across network-level virtualization. And then controller level will trade raw latency for predictability and services. So things like snapshots and deduplication and replication.
Of indirection and redirection technique that we discussed earlier. Corollary to this point is that files and object storage normally tend to sacrifice latency for sharing and scale. This is because the POSIX semantics and REST gateways.
Sorry about that. This is because the POSIX semantics and the REST gateways both add overhead. So, object storage and file storage have an extra processing layer that they need to go through. Nowadays, object storage over RDMA is showing a lot of potential to level the playing field.
But personally, I'm still unsure if you're still going to be able to see the sub-500 microsecond latency bar that you can see in block storage or RDMA. So, if you want a decision matrix of what steps should I follow when I'm trying to design storage information.
Infrastructure, this is it. You start with step one. You identify your workload access pattern. If it is transactional, you want low latency, you're using features like single writer, then go for block storage. If you're using shared hierarchical multi-user storage, then multi-user scenario, then
And go for file storage. And if you have a truly massive amount of data that you can geographically distribute and is immutable, that you're not going to change it often, and then you want to do analysis on that data, then object storage is the best one. Then, in step two, you want to pick and implement.
Implementation layer, which is where you will get the most value out of. And this is the most important one. So, if you want the lowest latency and control, highest control, go for the host-level virtualization. If you want some flexibility across vendors, a heterogeneous fabric, then go for.
Network level of virtualization. And if you want enterprise data services, predictability, and consolidate over multiple vendors, then go for controller-level virtualization. In step three, validate the choices that you have made against the nine-combination matrix, more like six-combination matrix above.
If your choice lands in the mainstream six, then great. You're doing what everyone else is doing. If it lands outside one of those three, so the less common three options, then you need to ask yourself whether the choice that you're making is truly justified. So whether the cost,
Of gateways and translation and POSIX semantics is worth paying. And then finally, you want to match the protocol to the path. So, NVMe or Fabric or RDMA, for example, will give you the best latency. TCP-based protocols will give you more reliability and will make sure that your
Solution is compatible to other vendors and heterogeneous solutions. I wanted to talk briefly about the concepts of data interaction and redirection. These are not new concepts, but still useful.
When you're trying to design a storage infrastructure, there's already a talk on the SNIA website and as well as on YouTube SNIA's YouTube channel where these topics, these concepts are covered in greater detail. The indirection is about abstraction, so you are mapping logical.
addresses to physical addresses, so LBAs to physical addresses. This enables you to provide functionalities like thin provisioning, snapshots, wear labeling, things that we discussed earlier without the application knowing. So something along the lines of having a centralized engine controlling where the data will go.
But it will give you the freedom. It will give the freedom of where the data can go, but the engine needs to keep track of where the data is going. So, flash translation layer inside an SSD is a common example of an indirection layer. Redirection layer gives you agility. So, sending I/O down to
Different path, you know, when you have a failover or migration or load balancing or creating snapshots. This is static in the sense that if you choose a path, you have to follow that path. And so this could be, for example, as trivial as forcing the data to predetermined loads.
Location and then keeping track of those predetermined blocks of location blocks with some clever math. By doing so, you can share that predetermined location or predetermined block information as well with other services. So it allows you to scale.
The reason I spent some time with this slide was because, in order to achieve the best performance while also ensuring that you can scale, is that you would want to have at least one of each of these. You would want to have one indirection layer and one redirection layer. The thing is, you would want to have.
At exactly one. If you have more than one of indirection or redirection layer, you would start seeing performance hits. And this is a hard problem to solve in a distributed system. Every virtualization technique that we discuss, host, controller, or network, will use a combination of these two mechanisms.
In some way, the difference is where that combination logic sits and how exactly is it optimizing your performance and latency. So, at the closing, I would like to say.
That if you're an architect or a software engineer trying to design a distributed storage system, you would want to worry less about blocks, files, or objects, or host level, or error level, or controller level, or network level virtualization. You want to first understand that what are the semantics?
Using which you will access the data. And then you want to understand where you can virtualize those semantics, so where it's okay for you to make use logical addresses, where is it okay that you need to have a physical address to actually access the data, and obviously the underlying protocol.
Call. You want to use the fastest, but you also want the ones that are easiest to implement and maintain. I think I'll spend the last couple of minutes to talk about storage AI, which is a community inside SNIA, talking about how to architect storage solutions for AI.
All the things happening related to AI. SNEA really cares about scale-up, scale-out, and scale-across terminologies. So, scale-up is when you're including the capacity in a single server by adding just more resources. Scale-out is when you add multiple of such servers in a row.
So, you know, make it a pod or something, then that's scale out, and scale across is when you are trying to increase your capacity by going across geographical locations. Each of these techniques have their own limiting capabilities.
Scale up will be limited by how much hardware you can fit into a server. Scale out will be limited by how well you can synchronize across multiple servers before it becomes too hard and too complicated, as well as limiting by performance. And then scale across will be limited by, obviously,
Global law regulations, whether you have power, whether actually you have land and resources available. So, if you're interested in what the SNEA storage AI community is doing, trying to architect some solutions and standardize some sort of storage solutions for AI across these three domains, then
Free to join the StoryAI community. The link I provided here in the slide, you can download the slide as well, the attachment tabs, and then consider attending the community meetings. All right, thank you, Rohan. So, we have a last poll for you.
Guys, so your feedback is appreciated. Do you feel better equipped and prepared to make a storage software stack and architectural decisions now? So please send your answers.
All right. Okay. I don't see the percentage moving. Oh, there you go. We have a response.
One yes. Okay. Eighty percent yes, thirteen percent somewhat, six percent no. Yeah, your feedback is is really appreciated because it helps us.
improve the content. So all right, seventy two percent yes, twenty two percent somewhat, four percent no and we ended
The poll. So all right. So yeah, yeah, go ahead, Rohan. Yeah, these are some of the recommended webinars that might further augment your knowledge.
However, we have one coming up pretty soon that we will try to talk about on-prem cloud and distribute hybrid storage systems in detail. But if you want to learn about PCIe, RDMA, or files, more details on files, blocks, and objects, feel free to refer to these previous webinars.
Some references from our talk. The last one is actually a great website. If you're new and learning about anything related to storage and/or AI, Provanda is a great website developed by one of our colleagues that really visualizes everything beautifully.
And it gives you a more hands-on experience when you're trying to learn the new concepts. All right. Thank you, Rohan. Yeah, so we're out of time to answer any questions. There were a couple of questions on the chat. I think we answered.
One or two of them. We have one that is pending, and we will reply with an answer in the next couple of weeks. So thank you for attending this webinar, and until next one.
