SNIA SDC StorageAI 2026 - NVMe LBA Access Control for GPU-Direct Storage in AI/HPC Workloads

All right, so I'm going to talk about what we are doing in NVMe regarding enabling the GPU accesses to NVMe storage. We are working on a technical proposal, LBA range access control.
Give you an idea of what's going on in that zone. So, modern HPC and AIML training and GPU cluster applications require fine-grained IOs and having granular access to NVMe namespace, it shows.
Increase in overall throughput. The pattern for the workloads that we have seen, we have dynamically changing requirements for LBA access ranges over the period of time and range shifting demands. So this is the
Main motivation to drive this work. So, traditional applications, they make a modest number of predictable core scan dense accesses. CPUs can easily saturate connections to storage. A subset of emerging AI applications, however.
They dominate a large number of dynamic, fine-grained, sparse accesses depending on the workloads you are running, training, inference, those kind of AI, ML workloads. For those applications, only GPUs have enough threads to saturate the connection to the storage.
So, imagine you have a bunch of GPU threads submitting a small number of IOs and saturating the underlying storage. Data set size are trending well beyond what fits into memory of many, many nodes. So, we have to reach to underlink storage.
We cannot just rely on keeping stuff in the memory. So, these are some of the examples that we have seen: graph neural networks, relational graph for predictive AI, e-commerce applications, and vector database search indexes. They have a tendency to.
Saturate the IOs by submitting the small block sizes as compared to what we typically see coming from the CPU high, high-density IOs. So these ranges, some of the experimentation that we have done and some of the
Work that we have done, we found these some characteristics that are shown by these ranges being accessed and worked on by GPUs. Sizes of these ranges go from MBs to TBs, they are never in KBs. The latency for acquiring and releasing.
Release is in microseconds, so you can do rapid acquired release of these ranges. Duration of these LBA ranges, it spans from a few seconds to a few months. And the overall scale, it depends on your deployment, your workload, and the status.
State of workload your setup is in. And they are dynamic, as in they need to be dynamically able to reallocate and assign to different GPU threads or GPU jobs. So this is an existing problem in overall.
Architecture that we have seen. On the left-hand side, you have typical CPU architecture, you have CPU, then you have operating system kernel, a trusted entity, and then you have NVMe controller and NVMe namespace. The new set of architecture that is emerging is you have GPUs.
And then GPU is directly accessing NVMe controller. And there is no intermediary trusted entity that can do the same job as the operating system kernel is doing for the CPU architecture. So for the left-hand side, a typical CPU.
We have different kind of security provided by operating systems such as Per process file descriptor table, UID, permission check, C Linux policies, file system coda enforcement. For the SCADA or GPU style setup architecture,
We don't have any per operation validation, kernel remediation, IO path, or VFS permission checks, or DMA address validation. So this is just another way of uh expressing the problem. Uh on the top side you have uh in the CPU path you have GPU memory. Uh
It does a PCI copy, goes to the CPU memory, and then you again have a PCI DMA that goes to the NVMe SSD. In a direct GPU path, you have GPU memory direct doing the direct PCI DMA to the NVMe SSD. And you can note that there is no kernel in path or any security.
Agent to enforce the access control mechanisms. So that forces us to move the access control mechanisms on a storage level to guarantee that similar kind of security. So I'll share this one example to show what we have seen.
Example of how ranges are shifted across a period of time. So at time T0, you have one single NVMe namespace, 32TB, and there are four jobs that are working on different ranges of one single
Namespace. At time T1, job D is finished training and releases the last chunk that is 24 TB to 32 TB. Meanwhile, job A's model has grown and now requires 12 more checkpointing.
So, this is how the updated range shifts look like. Now, job A has grown from just 4 TB to 0 to 12 TB, and job B has moved away from its original ranges to the new set of ranges, and job C again has moved to actually.
Accessing the new ranges. And finally, job A, B, C, they are settled down and they're working on these ranges, doing the weight weights, LLM weights, updates, acquire, release, and updating the weights through backpropagation and whatnot. So that's how the
That's one of the patterns that we have seen, that you have a single namespace and within that single namespace, different jobs are working on a data set, and they are shifting the ranges of the LBAs over the period of time. That time period goes from week, few weeks, two months, two months.
At times. So in existing setup, we cannot really achieve managing or acquiring these ranges given that NVMe existing mechanism is NVMe reservation.
So NVMe reservations allows you to take the reservation on the entire NVMe namespace. But if you want to lock certain subset of namespace, there is no mechanism for that. So our proposed solution is multi-host LB arrange access control.
That enables subname space range acquisition and release. So you can assign those ALBA ranges to specific jobs and they can carry out work for required for that job within those ranges. So the main key.
benefit uh of this is it maximizes the parallel host access by eliminating the NVMe level uh sorry namespace level bottlenecks. Uh it enables uh addressable and range-specific access enforcement uh at the storage level. It provides guaranteed native multi-host synchronization.
Directly at the storage protocol level without any external orchestration. So, these are two ways you can do a similar thing, but they don't help for our use case. One is to you can build static namespaces and move the data and work on those and take the results.
But we need one model that is already present on one namespace and that data needs to stay close to each other. So this proposed solution allows you to take the L L B A range logs.
Depending on your job, is there. So you can log sub-namespace LBA ranges and dedicate these LBA ranges to GPU threads, and GPU threads can work on these assigned ranges. So there are multiple use cases than just
GPU use case. One is database partitioning. Assume that you have data set is divided into two different parts. On the right side, it's a primary data. It needs a right exclusive access. And then in the middle, you have
Some historical data that is shared, read, and then on the right side you have the archival data. So, in existing mechanism, if you want any enforcement using NVMe reservations, you have to take the entire namespace reservation and others have to wait. But with new proposed mechanism,
You can do the LBA range locks or LBA range access control on sub-namespace level and gain the more granularity on more parallelism out of single namespace. The other example is PNFS.
Architecture can heavily benefit from doing the sub-namespace range logs. Similar to what I've showed here for database application. For PNFS, each client can lock its own range and it's allowed to work in that range. And if
Any other client coming from trying to access is uh the other client's range, then it will result in error. So that's pretty much the summary of this proposal that we are proposing uh LBA uh range access control mechanism that allows you to lock uh
LBA ranges to give you more control over parallelism. Any questions? Using host ID command. So the new command that
we'll be uh introducing uh that will carry a host ID followed by operation that is acquire followed by set of ranges. So if you have a yeah, the it can happen because the same problem also exists for NVMe reservations as well.
So Steve has a very strong reduced previous case going on here, which is mechanisms used are designed to work well with reservations and not go beyond what's already there in reservations. It works well for cooperating entities. If you get malicious entities that start exclusively, then you have the same problems with reservations that you would have.
Yeah. So this is pretty similar yeah. This is very similar to ATS in SCSI world, right? I mean, yeah, atomic test and set. Uh but then uh so ace uh essentially if the
If the client who is holding the reservation for that range goes away for whatever reason, so at least in the NVMe reservation or persistent reservations, there's a way to preempt those things. Do we have such mechanisms here in this proposal? So, given that, we assume this should be orchestrated.
And coordinated very well. I haven't received any strong justification to add primt or primt aboard operation. But if there is any use case, we'll be happy to explore that direction. And SCSI ATS is a completely different mechanism.
Yeah. So on your, when you showed the chart with like the LBA shifting, when you showed the chart with the LBA shifting, how does that like, if the LBA range of a host shifts, how does that get communicated back to the host that they're, like if you had to expand one of the things that you're going to have
For more space, you have enough. And then your LBA shifts. I can't hear what you say. So he's asking, how does the host know with this, how the range shift is communicated? So for each job, there is a set of LBAs that are mapped, and it's about
Of the job pipeline. And that agent runs from the CPU that is dedicated for communicating and providing the set of ranges and acquiring and releasing depending on the job completion. Okay, yeah. So, but like when you had the example of job A needing four terabytes.
More and then everything shifted up. So job B is used to accessing LBA 80 by 316. Then when it gets its new accesses, is that just logically on the drive the LBAs get remapped and then at no. No LBA remapping, it's accessing a different re region of the namespace. This is an overly simplified design.
Yeah, there's no data movement here. It's just range shift going from 1 to 4 TB to 4 to 8 TB, from 24 to 32 TB. Yeah, this is overly simplified design. CK, you're going to have to repeat this question. So he's asking: how does range shift coming?
So, it's on the CPU side agent is responsible for assigning the LBA ranges. That's what I was explaining to him. And his next question was: what happens to the data movement when the job is changing? There is no data movement, only LBA ranges are.
Change for a particular job because there is a new set of inference going on or training going on or back propagation is going on where it's updating all the ways that it has already traveled from query to finding the answer and now it's going back from answer to responding to the user.
This seems to imply that job completions all complete at the same time. How do you sync tasks to be able to increase or shrink or change those namespaces? So that is outside of this scope. So that is an orchestrator's response.
Responsibility, how to schedule the job. The purpose of this functionality is to provide acquire, release, and clear range acquisition and range release. That should not be in the NVMe spec. So you have a CPU agent that is.
Responsible for doing all the admin work. Also, it's responsible for issuing the admin commands like clear or report to see what's going on.
So in this case, we're using CPU-initiated I.O. And is there plans for when you go to GPU direct or SCADA? No, this is GPU-initiated I.O.
To be only GPU initiated. Yeah. That's the issue. Because it's initiated by GPU, there is no intermediary entity. So you can restrict those GPU threads to work in certain ranges only. In your examples, you
Use just a single namespace, but I presume that the model is not limited to a single namespace, it could be multiple namespaces. Yeah, it's not limited to single, but since it's a sub-namespace, try to zoom in and focus on single. So, this feature acts only on sub-namespace level, even if you have.
Multiple namespaces, you have to repeat it for every single namespace. I think we are good. Any more questions? I think we're good then. Thank you so much.