Towards Modular Software-Defined Edge Servers Using OCP DC-MHS Specifications

Hello everyone. I'm very happy to to be there with you in Barcelona to present you the results of uh this project I'm coordinating uh for TALES. So I'm Jean-Marc Philippe. I'm with TALES and uh I will let uh Loic to introduce it himself. So I'm Loic Nacelo, the technical director at TUSRSI.
Happy to be here. Okay, let's go. So the TALES group markets, we are known by for being a defense company, but we also have markets in the aerospace and the cyber and digital domains. We have a lot of challenges. You can see on the picture that we have a wide
Range of targeted systems and constraints out of the data center from handheld devices, drones, cars, trucks, planes, frigates, and submarines, also, and satellites. So we are designing systems for various operational environments: land, air, and
valence space, which can be defined as a edge, I think. But we also have relatively low volumes per product compared to data center operators. So this is a constraint for us. And uh we can see as a trend that these domains, while being different, uh are also increasingly interconnected with each other.
forming a continuum and with the arise of AI also everywhere in this system. So for us the ITOT convergence for application continuum but also for AI continuum is a key for future systems. As we can see on the diagram the cloud
Computing is driven by standardization and cost sharing with focus on the data to be processed, to be exchanged also between the compute and accelerators, and so on. For us, edge computing is driven by operational specific constraints with a focus on the mission it has to achieve. And this convergence,
brings big challenges because it brings autic constraints on IT systems. In order to solve this, uh especially at the hardware um hardware point of view, we have challenges to tackle. The first one is to bring performance to the system, but performance with energy. Uh so energy efficiency, so uh performance per watt.
In fact, and also low computation latency. We must also be able to adapt, update, and upgrade the hardware, the product hardware, in fact, to bring efficiency. We must also ensure the computing continuum. We are here to do that in this session. And also, while ensuring cybersecurity.
In the system. And finally, I would say we need also to be compliant with the swap C constraint. So swap for us is size, weight, and power and cost, while evolving in complex operational environments. And this is real issues. So the approaches we have for this convergence on the hardware
Side, I would say, is the legacy approaches, so catalog-based. We buy the systems from our providers versus the custom or full custom and the make approach. But all of these approaches have drawbacks related to cost, finding the right provider, etc. And it's difficult to find a common approach, especially for.
us with our low volumes that can fit a significant number of use cases. And this brings requirements for a new approach that we want to achieve, we want to study and it is related to the challenge I previously spoke of and we want here to design
Software-defined heterogeneous server, so optimized for the application they have to run, with efficient accelerators, high-speed, and low-latency interconnects. We want also to follow a modular approach at all levels of the system, and especially on the server level, the compute, the storage, the interconnect.
Connect the cooling and the power supply. And we want to use IT and cloud native technologies from the hardware and software sides and leverage existing cyber security mechanisms as far as possible. And finally, for the swap C and operational constraints we have, we want to adopt specification and standards with
Multiple form factors for the size point of view, but with power supply and cooling options, but allowing density first and also regularization because it's a real problem for us on the edge. Okay, we can see this hardware opportunity as a proposed approach, a modular edge service.
hardware based on open hardware IT. The goal was to study how to go from a modelic legacy approach, which is uh a static uh design, uh inability to evolve and so on, uh to a modular and satisfy approach from D C to the Hedge thanks to open hardware. This was uh really uh the the goal of this approach uh which was studied.
Some years ago. This approach is called Odyssey AI, which is also the project I'm coordinating now. The goal will be to be able to have modular design for purpose. These modules can be evolved independently, we can manage the life cycle of the system, and we can also open the system to multiple.
Vendors, which is nice for ensuring that we have providers for this, and which can include add-ons, especially security ones. And OCP specifications were natural candidates for this, and this is why we are here. And OCP MHS specifications were finalized in time for variable exploration, and you can see that the approaches.
Match pretty well, in fact. So, ODICE is an approach, but it's also a project funded by a France 2030 initiative. So, it's a French project. The goal is to have a hardware architecture with a software-driven processing power. So,
many core processors on a modular carrier, with accelerators, which is key there, and with power optimized accelerators, but also high performance. We want to be able to tailor the system to the application it has to run. The goal is to leverage OCP specification, but with the idea of being able to ruggedize them uh to uh target
Really, hedge systems. In order to abstract the hardware heterogeneity, we will rely on an orchestration layer on top of the operating system and firmware drivers with containers. And we want to run a different type of application with lob swap constraints, traditional rack swap.
Server, but we've also high swap constraints, so really the computers, the hedge computers that go, for example, on a truck. And this is very important for us. In order also to abstract the complexity of the hardware, we want to study unified programming approaches in addition to traditional AI framework. The security would
be uh put in this system with uh hardware authentication because we want to be able to host third-party boards. The goal is to derive this concept in two servers. The first one which is a traditional server, RAC server, but with uh edge constraints, uh OD one, and the second one is a rugged edge server.
a rug edge computer which is OD two. And I will let uh Loic present OD one. Thank you, Jean-Marc. So yes, here is the server. So it's no now t time to talk about the hardware. So as you can see, so this server uh is a nineteen inch system uh with low swap uh constraints uh as explained.
Uh the idea was to have something as modular as possible to be able to change the specifications very quickly according to the needs from the customers. And so for that, the V DC MHS specifications were very interesting for us because the ecosystem is already very rich. It enables
Very uh a lot of modularities. Sorry. So about uh the mu the management of the system, DCSCM uh w was the choice uh for this system. And uh we rely on uh MHPM for the colorboard, MN M DNO uh then MS DNO, so we'll talk about it a little bit later. Uh for
Power supplies, obviously, MCRPS was the choice. MPIC for connectivity and MXIO for high-speed connectivity, so PCI devices. We choose also to integrate a COMHPC module with the Ampere Ultra cloud native CPU. So this is a module we outsource and we integrate.
It onto our baseboard. About the modular design, so as I said, with the MXIO connectors, we can connect anything in PCIe, meaning we can have N.2 SSDs, E1S, OCPNIC3, PCIe HHL board, single or dual slot. So really, it's completely modular.
Uh you will see uh on the upcoming slides. Uh about the carrier board, so we we had different choices. Uh we looked uh first at MD M DNO uh specifications. Uh we looked at uh type three, wasn't it was uh out of the scope for an edge uh solution, it's more s mostly for uh dual socket uh
Uh systems. Same for type 4. The the board is too large. Uh the goal was to have a a dual node system. So uh a type 4 uh is too large for a a dual node system in 19 inch. That's why we focus uh fur at first on uh the type two from a VM DNO specification. And at the end uh we selected uh even the MSDL.
Class A 305 specifications for this board. There's a niche you want. Okay, so this is the board we developed. So as you can see, a standard MSDNO class A 3005 carrier.
Board with the connectivity at the front for DCSCM and OCP NIC3. Very standard. And then you have the MP connectors for power at the rear of the system to connect the power supplies. And the signal management connector.
Which are more located at the front with the front panel and so on, and also the management VI2C connectivity. And then we have the MXIO connectors to connect storage, accelerators, additional NIC cards located at the front.
Front. Then for this project, we had to develop a power distribution board. So, as explained earlier, we focused on the MCRPS PSU, but we wanted to keep also a backward compatibility with standard CRPS PSUs. So, we validated both on this design. And we went to
directly to a 3.2 kilowatt uh per PSU design uh just to be future-proof about the TDP, but yeah, we can put uh lower grade uh PSUs uh if needed. For the connectivity between this PDB, uh the motherboard and the other components, we we choose also uh like the mainboard, uh the the MP power connectors. Uh uh
And we use the standard pin uh pin out uh uh for management. With all of this uh assembled, how this is how it looks uh at the end, the system. So you have the this dual node system which is very short, uh 49 centimeters uh in a 19 inch and 2U uh footprint. Uh
And uh with very uh a lot of uh possibilities uh on the configuration. So for example, we could have uh so the node two nodes are a little slightly different, but uh uh on this configuration uh each one uh have an OCP Next three uh and
the DCSCM module uh on the lower uh uh floor. On the middle floor uh on the left you have two E1S, on the right uh for this configuration we have one PCI card. In the middle we have one additional SEPINIC three or one end up two uh end up two uh SSD uh for the
Right node and the front IO connectivity like the power button and so on and USB ports for each node. And the upper level we have LS2M.2 or 1M.2 at the right node and five.
Finally, at the last level, you have obviously the PSUs in the middle, mostly for the cooling constraints, sorry. And you can have accelerators, so it could be any accelerators. We started to qualify with our partner Calorie, but at the end, we can put any accelerator as long as it's qualified.
to three hundred watts. Uh the target obviously is a little bit lower, but we we could go uh that high uh if needed. Could be GPUs, FPGA, ASIC uh or or any card you you would need. So yeah the MCRPS P C PSU is uh located in the middle uh uh and in N plus one uh configuration.
So I'll let back the mic to Jean-Marc. Thanks, Loic. As a conclusion on perspective, so this project is followed by the France 2030 initiative. So we are TALES coordinating the project. We have 2CRSI for the server and Calais as an
Accelerator for sovereign AI. But what we want to design here is a software-defended server using open hardware specifications. So we have OD1, which is 20 liters. But we want also to build a product family of contenting server using the same specifications, the form factors, leverage.
OCP MHS. And the goal here will be to focus on the next instance, OD2, on the swap, size weight and power, and logadization with this new server, the computer, which is meant to be a 10-liter computer. With the perspective
To have new modular platforms by reducing the size while keeping the concept using, for example, smaller OCP form factors. I was very happy to see MHS emerging for the next former months. And using, for example,
Smaller computer module form factors. And the goal is to develop the concept for use cases such as drone, for example, or file data centers, C2 or C3, for example for TALES. This initiative is open, I would say, to industrial third party and stakeholders. We do not want to do it alone.
Perhaps if there is interest in the OCP community on a ruggedized server, we can do something with you and within the OCP community. Thanks a lot. Thank you. Questions?
I want to know more about the use case of OTIT convergence. So what is the point of factory owners' primary motivation to promote OTIT convergence? Yes, it it's the fact that in our future system
we will have, and it's already the case, in fact we discussed about combat cloud, for example, for defense applications. And we have regional clouds that can communicate with local clouds and even edge regional data centers that communicate with different trucks, you know, on the battlefield and so on. So it's already there in defense systems.
So, the goal is really to be able to have the continuum from the IT on the battlefield or on civilian locations, because we also have civilian. That was my second question. So, one of the use cases is cloud and edge federation.
Okay, thank you, Bluetooth. Exactly. Hi, I have a question regarding the use of the DCSCM in your project. Is there how many DCSCMs are in there? If you have two nodes, you probably have two.
So, is there any plan for a multi-node DCM in the future when DCSCM version 3 is ready? Is there any? One DCSCM for two nodes? Sorry? You mean one DCSCM for two nodes? Yes, or even more in the future, but since you have two in that system, is that planned for?
Looking at that? For now, it's not, but it's an interesting input indeed. Yeah, for future systems, for example, trying to increase density. Yes, we are interested in Tales, yeah. Everything that increases the density of compute or something like this, and also the be able to write.
Organize things, we are interested in that. Excellent. Thank you. Thank you. As you were commenting on the density, can you specify typical or range of density in terms of, for example, power or number of nodes per rack or something that you are targeting?
So about power uh on this design we can go up to two hundred and twenty five watt per CPU. So this is the kind of power we have. On uh on the accelerator level it's up to three hundred watts. Uh this is the the target for the accelerator. Uh and then uh about the footprint uh per racket it's a two use server so depending on
and the rack density you have, but the power per server is not that high, so uh I guess you could fill a a complete lobby with that uh if needed. And f uh for the use cases would you typically then fill one rack or multiple racks or how so for the use cases it's me I think.
One point here for especially density was the depth of the server. Because we wanted also at TALES to sell the the server or the concept to our GBUs, global business units, and a significant number of them have depth constraints. For example, in a submarine, a frigate, and a airplane and so on. So we want
A real dense server, which is why because this is why it is under 50 centimeters. And yes, density is very important for us. Thank you. Thanks. Thank you so much. It was a pleasure.
