SNIA SDC StorageAI 2026 - Enabling AI Storage Benchmark Evolution at the Pace of AI

Hey, everyone, I'm Wes. I'm at Micron. I'm going to cover benchmarks and workloads. Initially, I think benchmarks are going to.
Sound like kind of an unimportant topic, but I want everyone to realize that benchmarks are used to really let us know how we're doing on development. And this is kind of the biggest challenge that we really have right now as the pace of AI evolution is increasing. Our ability to measure the impact.
Of the products that we're developing becomes critical to our development of those products, right? So, the only way that we can do that is by having well-defined systems and processes that we all agree on, so that when we measure things in our lab and in test dev environments, those measurements actually refer back in some way to the thing that we're trying.
To do, which is create a product that is going to impact system performance and TCL. Okay, so a little bit about myself. Like I said, I'm at Micron, architect focused on high-performance SSDs. I'm also chairing a new twig in SNEA, the AI Data Workloads Twig. I will have a couple
Slides on that at the end. And when I inevitably don't leave enough time for questions, I will be here in a couple hours for a BOF where we can also answer some questions. And then another BOF after that, I'll be running to hopefully get more input and discussion around what are the gaps.
In benchmarks and workload definitions for AI systems. In terms of sort of, you know, what have I been doing? 15 years in performance engineering. Started on databases, storage arrays back in my Dell years. Been at Micron for like 10 years working mostly on AI systems.
We get a lot of folks up here who talk about, you know, hey, I was like on the MLC patent, that sort of thing. I don't have that sort of history, but I have a little weirder one. I started running benchmarks back when I was in high school when I got my first gaming system and started overclocking it. So if anyone remembers, and I know there are some older ones in here.
That will. You had to use a lead pencil when you were overclocking because you had to, you know, get that resistance value to change. And in that same time period, I actually started looking at storage for the first time because if you get a really cheap drive, then your game loading times are absolutely awful. So I started trying to figure.
Out, well, what you can do on storage on just like a gaming PC to increase your game loading times or improve your game loading times. To the point where I actually ran a benchmark submission on one of the overclocking forums back in the day. Not gonna share which one that is, but so I've got a really long history of looking at benchmarks and trying to figure out.
Like, how do we benchmark something to optimize the thing that we care about? So, what I'm gonna talk about today are MLperf storage, because I've been participating and contributing to MLperf storage for about three years now, and then the new AI data workloads twig. So, I'll give you sort of an overview of both of these.
and then some insights into some of the specific workloads that we're looking at that are being added as benchmarks and sort of the challenges that we need to overcome. And then like I said, at the BOF later on this evening, would really like to have conversations with you all about the places that you see gaps.
When we're trying to do product development and we need to represent a real system, what are the gaps in trying to do that? Okay? So, MLperf storage, sort of a brief history. MLperf storage, I think, is probably like the premier well-known option for trying to benchmark storage.
For AI systems. We've had three submission rounds to date, and we've got the fourth one coming up in June, I believe, which is actually 3.0, because we started at version 0.5. The fundamental problems that we're trying to solve with MLPerf storage are the cost of accelerators.
Needing to use accelerators to benchmark storage is not really a sustainable process and it's certainly not scalable, right? The other problem that we face is data sets that we can use for benchmarking are small compared to what our customers actually use. So, for example, if we look at recommendations.
Systems. One of the data sets that is commonly used for benchmarking is the Critio Click Logs data set. And it starts out at about a terabyte in size, and then you pre-process this and you get down to about 300 gigs that you're going to do training on. And then when you train, you only do a partial epoch, so you read about 250 gigabytes of that.
It's pretty trivial to get 250 gigabytes of memory attached to your CPU, and we're hitting that threshold where you can have 250 gigabytes of HBM, so like this data set's almost meaningless. And when we look at published documentation about how big are recommendation data sets, we can look at the data that Meta has shared.
So this is understanding data storage and ingestion for large-scale data or deep recommendation model training. Very highly cited paper. They show in that paper that when they're training a recommendation system, they're on the order of 25 petabytes for a training job. So 25 petabytes is significantly different.
From the 300 gigabytes that we have for an example data set. So we need a methodology and process for creating data sets that we can do benchmarking on that at least represent the parts of the system that we care about at that time, right? And that changes depending on which system we're actually looking at. From a storage perspective,
We have a little bit more flexibility to just sort of throw some data at something and say, hey, let's move it around. We don't really care what the compute is doing. Not everyone has that luxury. ML Commons has a bunch of benchmarks that they've had for quite a few years, so, like ML Perf Training, Inference, Automotive.
Points benchmark. But many of these remove their storage dependence. So when we look at training, they've got processes designed to ensure that you take all of this data, you preload it into your CPU memory, and then you start timing your training run so that zero I/O actually happens to storage. That helps give you a really pure.
Your result on compute, and if you're trying to make a compute benchmark, that's a really useful thing to do. However, it's not useful for us in the storage industry to have a benchmark that is set up to not touch storage. So, ML Perf Storage aims to address this. We have the ability to.
Create data sets for the workloads that we're doing. And those data sets are reasonably good. Most of what we want to represent is sort of data layout and access pattern. The question that always comes up is compressibility and dedupability. That's not currently a feature. So it's either
It's pretty much all true random data right now, or pseudo-random. So, not very compressible, not very deducable, not very representative of what we're actually going to see. It's going to represent our worst-case scenario. There is work to try to implement that in the tools. The problem that we've always had in the past is we can look at a tool like FIO, which lets you set deduceable.
Capability and compressibility, and it's like, great, that's a bunch of C code. How do we get this into the DLIO Python tool that we're using to actually generate this? I'm optimistic that we'll actually get this moving pretty soon because coding agents have made some of these problems way easier to deal with, right?
MLperf Storage 3.0, the two biggest new workloads are going to be a vector database workload and a KVCache management workload, which I think everyone can agree are probably the two that we really, really wanted and are happy that they're coming out in this time period. We did also go through and update the training models.
We had been using UNET 3D, ResNet, and CosmoFlow, all of which were old models and have been deprecated in the other MLPerf working groups. So now it's DLRM, Retinanet, and Flux. Still some research going on to get those lined up to be the final versions, but like I said, June submission period.
See those final versions. S3 support is being added, and right now it looks like it works through the whole pipeline. So, if you want to run MLPerf storage against object stores, that is a thing you can do, which is, I think, one of the most absolutely fantastic things that they've been able to do. I think that's probably more impactful.
To a lot of people, almost than either the vector database, the vector database work. A whole bunch of other stuff, again, coding agents make so much of this so much easier. So, better package management, better dependency version locking, improved cluster-wide metric collection.
Better validation of inputs with fast fail. We've re-architected it to be modular, make it easier to add new workloads in the future. And we finally have code tests, because cloud doesn't really care how long it takes it to write code tests, and it doesn't have its boss telling it, hey, you don't really have time to do this, get this moving, right? So it's great.
The SNEA AI data workloads twig. So we had our first meeting in February. We're meeting bi-weekly, and we've had two misses because of GTC and this conference. And we're really just getting started, but especially after conversations yesterday, last evening, and then just around here.
Really optimistic for the things that we can do and the things that we can address. I'm chairing that. Our vice chair is Glenn Bowden from HPE. The charter on this currently is, I would say, pretty narrowly defined because when we started this, we had.
A few people in the industry that were interested in doing this. So we defined what we knew we could do over the course of a year without sort of pitching this to the entire working group. Now that we've opened it up to the working group, we have more members and we see the participation and interest, we're likely going to want to expand.
Our charter and scope of work. But like I said, focus charter, right now we're focused on defining workloads, workload definitions, and a process for running that against an isolated storage target. So we're trying to focus on like individual devices.
And individual sort of storage systems. A lot of what we're looking at is trying to hit that sort of test dev validation type workflow, where this is something that you can scale to a thousand systems, and it's an effective tool that you can use in sort of our development processes. That does limit us.
Into sort of the realm that we can run things. We can't use a lot of compute. The way that most of us are going to do test and validation against SSDs is a small system with a drive in it, and then we copy that a thousand times. The initial program of work, so we've got our first six months and the next six months. The first ones, one I think, really.
Interesting workload and two workloads that used to be interesting, and now a lot of people in here are probably just sort of brushing off. But KV caching is the interesting one, and we're doing a lot of work on that to characterize and understand so that we can provide a methodology that we've used to create a synthetic definition and then a process for running that synthetic definition as well.
As a way to represent scaling at that synthetic point that represents scaling at the real level. Training for checkpointing and ingest, I think, are significantly simpler, but having these standardized definitions.
Should be useful for all of us. And then this is to lead into where I think we get a lot more interesting work, where we're definitely going to need more engagement with people in the industry, our customers, vendors, et cetera. So the first one's accelerator-initiated GNN training. So CJ was just stubborn.
Here, talking about GPU accelerated or GPU-initiated GNN. We need to be able to represent workloads for that. And I think we need to be able to do it at a couple different places. So he did call out that they're using GPUs to actually orchestrate because you can't do enough I/Os from a CPU. However, when we go to an
Individual device level, so if someone's making a drive that does 25 million, 50 million, 100 million IOPS, we need to be able to test that drive in isolation with a CPU instead of a GPU. So we need to develop a methodology to do that that's going to be representative of what some of these workloads would look like when it's in a scaled system.
Database indexing and search, and then AI model offload. So, not really LLM and not KV cache, but if we're really using storage as more of an extension of memory, what does that look like? Okay, so those are goals, programs of work, charter. I'm gonna go through a couple of the workloads.
Briefly. I think. Yep, there we go. Checkpointing. So if you want to know more about checkpointing, you can go to the other room in an hour and a half, and my colleague John Mazey is going to be talking about checkpointing. Briefly, I think the
Main thing to take away is that checkpoints are big. They're a lot bigger than when we just look at the model. So if you go into Hugging Face and look at a model and you want to download that, that is different than the checkpoint because the checkpoint needs to include the optimizer states and a few other things, which result in something significantly bigger. Now, whether or not this
Is a problem. So let's say we look at a 400 billion parameter model. You've got around two to five terabytes of capacity that you need to do for flushing a checkpoint. This is going to be dependent on the size of the cluster that you're using, because the size of the cluster you're using directly influences the rate of failures in your cluster.
The sort of naive way of looking at how these failures of systems come together. With training being a synchronous process, any individual component failing means the whole thing fails. So we take the failure rate of a component to the power of the number of components, and that tells us the failure rate of the system.
Technically, it's the rate of not failing to the power of systems, and it's that one minus thing. But it goes to the power of the number of components. So at 100 GPUs in a cluster, your failures are weeks apart. And you're going to checkpoint maybe on a daily basis, and even if you're training a
Relatively large model, writing a few terabytes per day, easy peasy, right? Anything can handle that. As we start scaling into the 10,000 and beyond, that's where we start getting failures in the minutes between failures. And then if you get out really far past 100,000 into like the million in a cluster, this is where failures.
Look like less than a minute. And at that point, just trying to figure out how you can write your checkpoint quickly enough is not the way to be solving that problem. The people in that domain are doing this differently. But we still want to be able to represent this, still be able to show if a drive is in an AI server directly and it's being used for checkpoints.
Pointing, what does that workload look like? How do we make sure that we're testing for these cases and find bugs that may only come up with the complexity of the actual application, or at least a close enough synthetic version of the application? Okay, so vector database. This is sort of just a brief intro, and I think CJ actually gave some.
Good color on it. Main thing to take away from vector database is it's not just rag, so it's not just looking something up to feed into an LLM. You can use vector databases for recommendation or for fraud detection, where the vector database itself is effectively your use of that AI model. Because the model in this context is what we took to take.
Whatever this data was, and turn it into an embedding vector that lives in this contextual vector space that has meaning with where it is compared to other vectors, right? So it's training a model to be able to do that, and then by seeing where things are similar, that's where we actually gain benefit. Now, when we actually need to do something.
With vector databases, there's mostly two parts that we want to look at from a benchmark perspective. And I know if I just say there's two, someone's going to raise their hand and ask questions about other parts. There's other parts, but like these are the two that we're going to focus on: creating indexes, and then actually doing search. So index building is
Is one of the most painful aspects of a vector database today, and it's because what we're effectively doing is front-loading compute to make search more efficient. So we're willing to trade high compute upfront so that we can efficiently search in ways that work well. And part of that is, for example, how do we share?
Shard vector databases and do that well. Vector databases are frequently a subtype of graph that has specific constraints so that it shards well. But doing so, again, puts that compute up front. So if we need to do a ton of compute and a ton of I.O. up front, and you can't really
Do a lot of updates for most of the vector databases, at least at this point. That means you're rebuilding an entire shard, and if you need to rebuild shards frequently, this becomes an important workload in an environment. If you want to know more about this, Alessandro from Solidime is going to be talking about vector database. I haven't actually looked at
Looked at his presentation, but I know he always does good ones, so feel free to check his out if you want to know about vector databases. On the benchmarking side, in terms of challenges, one of the early challenges that we faced is in terms of tools, the tooling around vector databases was not concerned with performance.
Performance, so much as it was with accuracy. So, the intent of the earlier tools was to: okay, we have this index and we have some data, and if I get my results, what is my recall rate? How accurate was I from my approximate search versus what a true search would be? And when we need to just test performance,
And understand what a workload does to a device or how it depends on a device, pretty much don't care about accuracy. The device is not going to change accuracy. So in MLPerf Storage, we have a tool now that is mostly focused on just doing random data.
This is a dangerous aspect though. So the quality of results and the characteristics of the workload for some indexes are heavily dependent on how data is related to each other. So like how much your data is clustered.
In the data set that you're using. So, a full random data set means that you get a different workload from those indexes than you would with a data set that is matching something real. So, for disk ANN, that's not a problem. It's gonna look the same on disk, regardless of full synthetic data or real data. And since it's MLP,
Storage, that's the main thing that we're testing right now. So, this works there. It does also let you test HNSW. HNSW is dependent on the data, so you just need to be aware of what you're testing if you're using this tool for HNSW with synthetic data or for some of the other indexes. I know NVIDIA is also working on this at GTC, they did talk.
About wanting to generate very large vector data sets that are mimicking true data sets. And I think they're expecting to publish something by the end of this year. And that will help fill in the gap so that we can then create very large data sets that do replicate real data set behavior. So we're not going to get sort of funky effects.
Like I said, MLPerfStorage now has that vector database workload in it. So there's going to be a vector database benchmark. This will do end-to-end. So it's going to load a data set, execute a set of queries against it, measure the performance of that, and you can use whatever storage system you want on the back end. I think the plan right now is to.
Only use Milvis, so everyone's gonna need to plug their storage behind a Milvis database. But that gives us consistency on the front end, so we're really just trying to figure out how storage actually impacts the system. KBCache. Hopefully, you were in here at 2 o'clock when
When Ur gave her presentation and before that, when Esker gave her presentation as well. I am again going to talk about KVCache, but mine is a more hand-wavy explanation, just to make sure that we're all in the sort of right headspace of understanding why we're talking about this and what we're doing.
Again, if you want a better understanding of the actual internals and what's happening, please refer to their presentations. The fundamental piece to know, and we're just gonna keep on harping on this until it's second nature and everyone just tells us to stop talking about it: the size of KVs versus the time.
It takes to generate the KVs. The time it takes to generate them grows quadratically. So by the number of tokens, n, it grows O squared. Whereas the size is linear. If you have 100 tokens or 1,000 tokens, that's 10 times the size of the
10 times the capacity to hold the KVs for those tokens, but calculating those is not just 10 times longer, it's significantly longer. And it's because each token effectively needs to refer to everything that came before that, and that means each new one adds additional compute based off of the number of.
Tokens that came before that. And then a lot of folks have talked about the size of KV. One of the other data points that I think really drives home this point and why it's important. So if we have an eight-way B200 system, you know, like a four-use server, eight B200.
NVLink between all of them. And we're doing the Lamba formaveric model, FP8. One million tokens is about 15 gigabytes of KV cache. Pre-fill on a million tokens would be 140 seconds. So when we're talking
About KV cache loading from disk needs to be fast enough so that it's faster than the time it takes to calculate. It's pretty darn easy to move 15 gigabytes of data in two and a half minutes, right? So the constraints on this from just being good enough, those are easy. And I think.
Like the work that Esker was talking about and trying to model this and show more of the efficiency gain, we need to start looking in that domain when we're talking about KV cache. We need to make the assumption that everyone's already talking about using KVCache. We don't need to compare against not using KVCache anymore. Doing that is like the SSD file.
Folks, just trying to compare to hard drives still. Like, yeah, we're faster than hard drives, but that's not the point anymore, right? So, it's the same thing here. We need to move the conversation forward and understand what are the effects on total system efficiency and the cost of generating tokens, and how does the quality and performance of storage affect that? How does the cost of your
Storage actually affects that. And then one note on KVCache, there's sort of two terms, and I try to use them in the way that I define here, and I'm really bad at it. I will say offload over and over and over, and I never mean offload the way that I have written here, I mean reuse. Offload is
When you need to read the KVs during decode for every single token, the most common form of offload is gonna be using the CPU memory to hold some of the K Vs. And you can move this through, and you've got enough bandwidth that it gives you a net benefit if you have a portion of your KVs on CPU memory. If you try to do that with storage, it's
Problematic. You can put fast enough storage in there so that you can provide a benefit to your system, but that's generally not what we're talking about when we're talking about KV cache on storage today. What we're talking about is reuse, where you need to access some KVs, and then all of that's going to make it into HBM memory, and then it's going to stay there as you're doing success.
Of token generation. So it's just this one-time cost penalty from needing to read from storage, whereas this offload, what I call offload, is an every single token penalty that you would need to pay. Okay, so Agentic is KV is driving the conversations around.
Storage and agentic is driving the conversation around AI. And we will not finish. I don't know when the next new fun thing is going to be where we stop saying agentic and we talk about something else. But I think this is here to stay for a while. Fundamentally, when we talk about agentic, the thing that is different is
Is we're giving a model agency. A model can do something, and that doing something is the effect of a tool call. So a model can create a command that needs to be run, like a git command or a grep command or something like that. And then the orchestrator that you're using, so claude code or roo code or Klein or
Or any of these tools, will then just execute that. What changes is if you have your model and you ask it something and it says, I need this data, I need to run this command to look at this log, and then that happens, and that data from the log goes back in, this human-in-the-loop part is gone, and things are just progressing at a significantly faster rate than we can.
Do with human in the loop. Now, the other part of this is as we keep going on through these multiple turns, every turn forward is carrying along everything that came before that. So, when we talk about kb cache reuse, in this case, let's look at a query that we have. So, we have our system prompt and we give it some tokens, it generates a tool call, which could be really small.
It may only generate like 100 tokens. And then you run that, and boom, you've suddenly got 4,000 tokens that are being fed right back in. It's gonna do some thinking, it's gonna generate some tokens, it's going to create another command, all of that data goes back in. And each time we do this, the entire context is getting longer. So with these blue bars, the overlap is the reuse part.
Bottom one, the context two above that is available for reuse theoretically, depending on the system that you have set up. The way that this gets more complicated is agents, one of the tool calls that they can use is spawn agent, and you can do this in parallel. So, and I don't have the parallel part written out here, but if you have
Let's say this top session going, and you're using something like Claude Opus, which is a really big model, and then it's spawning these smaller agents. And let's say we're using Haiku or Sonet, a much smaller model, and we've got this KV section for a subtask, and then when we go back, that KV for that subtask is now used.
It's never going to get used again. Like, we can discard that, and then we go back to the big one, and then we come back down. One of the things that I want to note from here is not all cache hits have equal value. So, this top model is bigger and more expensive to run by a factor of 10x. And if the subtasks that it's running take on the order of minutes to
Maybe an hour, then it's possible that those KVs from the top orchestrator session were evicted, but those were the most expensive ones for us to recreate. So a system that has knowledge about the importance of KVs for individual sessions is another way to generate value from KV cache management.
MLPerf storage is going to have a KVCASH benchmark. It's a pretty self-contained top to bottom. It's going to generate a workload. It's going to represent the data movement from CPU down to storage. You can plug in any storage system, should support object storage as well. It has a set of workloads that it's going to execute. There's going to be documentation for that.
This is one of the main things that we're working on in the SNIA Twig right now as well. And one of the difficulties is we start with this query sequence, and then we have to attach a model serving framework, and then we use a KB cache management system, which is going to talk to a file system or object storage, has an underlying storage system, and then at the very bottom, we get these drives, which
Means we've got a ridiculous number of layers that can modify this workload before it ever hits a device. So, this is the complexity and challenge in trying to create a workload that we can do at this bottom edge. And where we care about is sort of these bottom three in the AI data workloads twig. So, what we want to do is run the workload, trace the workload.
Workload, analyze the traces, change some things, and find out which behaviors are consistent across these changes, and generate this workload in a way that if we do it at the file system level, you use the file system and whatever sort of MGTS and other settings that you need, and that's going to turn into whatever IOs, yours.
System is going to be optimized for, and we don't need to care about that in our workload. Okay, so that is my presentation. Like I said, I will be here for questions in the next BOF, and then I have a BOF after that one as well, just to talk more about this. And like I said, I really want to hear what everyone has to say about what you think we can do.
And what you think we're missing so that we can start driving these requirements over the next year. Thanks. We'll hold the questions for the clock.