SNIA SDC StorageAI 2026 - Data Storage Innovations for Scalable AI Infrastructure

Hello everyone. I would suggest we get started for the next presentation. Can you all hear me all right? Yes, okay. And I think the slides are there too. So my name is
is Eric Carrage. I work for Marvel, where I lead the storage architecture team. So I came two years ago for the first time to a regional SNER event. It was back then in Austin. And my main motivation was to learn more about AI and what the implications are for storage.
I came again back next year, and um it's my pleasure to present here about data storage innovations for scalable AI infrastructure. So when I started looking at this a few years ago, you know, I was wondering how much storage do you really need for AI? And you know, initial comments from random people were
There are not that many SSDs per GPU that you need. The kind of the models, they don't need that much capacity. But I think what everyone missed back then is how much it would scale up. First of all, in terms of number of GPUs. I mean, we're talking now about 100,000 plus GPU clusters, maybe going to one.
So that alone, of course, drives lots of SSDs because for every few GPUs you need SSDs directly attached. Then, of course, even though kind of the models themselves and also the data set sizes can be compressed, there's so much going on before and after that drives a huge need for data storage.
So, I'll give here a talk about the system-level kind of implications of AI and what it means for storage to give you a sense of where storage is needed, how is it used, and how much storage is being deployed. So, you can see my outline here. I'll talk briefly.
About the AI evolution scaling trends. I think it's very important to start first with a look at memory. What are the memory pressures inside AI data centers? Ideally, you would like to have, of course, everything in memory if you could, but you can't. So, and then that's
Of course, then leads to memory storage hierarchies. I'll talk about that for scalable AI systems. And then I will talk about what it means for future flash storage devices in the AI data center. So I think, you know, of course, GPUs were very hot, memory became very hot.
And now, I think since the mid of last year, data storage is very hot in AI. So, I've collected here just a few headlines in terms of hard drives making a huge comeback. Even today, I think if you check the stock prices, some the HDD share prices of the leading vendors are up significantly.
can live today due to AI, the demand for AI. Interestingly, this high demand for hard drives and kind of the lack to fulfill that demand due to supply chain constraints actually is accelerating the adoption of QLC SSDs in the AI data center.
Then, of course, there are also developments in terms of optimizing data storage, and especially the data storage tiers for the AI data center. I mean, Nvidia announced last year the Dynamo platform. CJ, who is here, is championing storage next. There was a new
KV Cache Tier announced that it uses storage as well this year. And also, SNIA has become very active. So there's a storage AI effort here with several working groups. So, what are the key milestones? I'll not spend too much time on it. I'll just say, okay, it started.
All the ChatGPT generative AI, then it led to reasoning, which means that you do then generative AI in multiple steps. So, what did it do? It really amplified the number of tokens that are being generated. So, we are now in the agentic AI phase. What does that mean? It means that you can run dozens, hundreds.
Thousands of agents in parallel as a single user. So that, of course, drives a massive growth in terms of tokens. And of course, it has huge implications in terms of then how do you manage this in terms of memory and also in terms of storage. Also, I would like to highlight, I think, there are also some new developments very recently.
That became a bit more apparent, and it's about AI also moving more to the edge and more to the end user. So, some of you may have heard about OpenClaw, you know, where there are many super users now who actually are buying small.
Machines to run agents on their small machines locally. You know, first of all, to do to have local control over the agents, but also there are platforms available to install local LLM models on your local machine. So I think there are also implications going forward then in terms of what does it mean also for data.
Data storage and also memory. Let me talk about local AI, local inference. Okay, so in terms of the AI models, you know, I think it all started this whole evolution when AlexNet and ResNet came out in 2012, where people realized that AI actually.
Worked. The application here was really image classification. So these algorithms had a much higher success rate than prior algorithms. So I think that's really where this new AI hype really started. It then reached, of course, a new peak then when the
When ChatGPT was launched and has continued since then. So, you know, I think it's important to look at the model sizes. It started with model sizes for image classifications, where we talk about dozens of millions. We talk about gigabytes of data sizes for tracks.
So, the first thing that happened is that the model sizes really grew significantly in terms of the number of parameters, you know, to the one billion range and up to about two, and then even more to one to two trillion. I think, you know, kind of the growth.
Growth in terms of model size somewhat slowed down, as you can see here. On the other hand, the training data size really kept growing. So it's growing much faster than the model sizes. So here you can see just numbers based on these examples that parameters grew roughly by 10 to 30x.
From GPT-3 to today, where the training data grew 100x. And that reflects one of the scaling laws that you need disproportionately more data to realize the full capacity of a model. And also, there's a lot of effort now in terms of having very optimized models that are quite powerful.
How much memory is really needed for training? So I tried to capture that here in a simple equation. So the training memory that needs to be stored during training, and it's in GPU memory. So you need to store the model state. It has several components.
Weights, then additional kind of internal data, optimizer states, gradients. And then also so-called activations need to be stored as well. And the activations are also a number of the parameters, but it's just a fraction of the number of parameters where you need to store the activations. And then, you know, in terms of
Precision, we are talking usually about two bytes, two bytes per model parameter. And then training data, use tokens. So the precision typically is two bytes for per token. So when we kind of translate this then in terms of actual gigabytes, terabytes.
You can see this here. So, the latest models in terms of storing just this data, I mean, there's a bit more also for the activations. We're talking about terabytes of data. It's not really huge from a storage perspective. And then, when we talk about the token size for training, we are talking again about terabytes.
Dozens of terabytes. Again, I mean, not like super huge from a storage perspective, but from a memory perspective, of course, it's large. And I've included here also kind of one of the newest frontier models that was just published, I think, this week or last week, the DeepSeq V V4.
Pro, so with 1.6 trillion parameters and you know 33 trillion tokens apparently were used to train this. So you know model and training data sizes are not huge, but you know you want to ideally fit the whole model state in memory for
Training, ideally in one compute node. So that's where we then come up to this concept where training is not done just on one kind of compute tray, but multiple compute trays that are connected together using a scale-up network.
And one motivation to do this is so that you can fit as much as possible of the model state and into this one supercomputer. Then also, in order to finish training for the frontier models within a reasonable amount of time, within a month, the training is pipelined over thousands of computer nodes.
So that really then leads to clusters that have ten thousands of GPUs for training. So since you have so much GPUs, and these compute servers trace, they can fail. You need to checkpoint from time to time. So what i and the
Point is to save the model state from time to time so that you don't lose kind of your training progress, but can restart after failure from when the failure happened. So I think it's good to look at that because, of course, it's important from a storage perspective. So here's an example.
About a 1.6 trillion parameter model, 30 days of training, you checkpoint every 30 minutes. So it leads to about 50 plus petabytes of transient data. But then, in terms of the persistent data, it's smaller, it's 200 terabytes. And the data flow usually goes from GPUs to NVMe to the local NVMe drive.
To a parallel file system and then to object storage. So that's training. So let's talk about inference. And I know there's a topic here that is relevant, KVCache. It has been talked about just in a prior talk. I also know Curtis covered it in his talk this morning.
Keynote speech. So here just a quick summary. So for inference, you know, you need the model weights and then you need also the context, the so-called KV cache. So in terms of the weights, so it's the it's d it's given by the model parameters, the precision. Here you can optimize the precision.
Typically, from two bytes down to one byte, sometimes even to half a byte, you know, for certain applications. And then kv cache is also a function of the, you know, also is a function actually of additional parameters. First of all,
Uh it has model parameters. You know, it's dependent on the model depth and model width. Um it depends on the number of tokens in the context, you know, like how long is your prompt and you know do you provide additional context uh through through like a rag system.
But then also, you know, when you do inference, you would have multiple users on the same kind of compute node. So you need to multiply all of this also by the number of concurrent users. And that really drives up the storage, then even more. You know, you were talking about, you know,
Dozens of users per compute node, and then in a data center, of course, then you know, thousands of users, you know, doing inference at the same time. So, here, in the next slide, here, I show the actual inference complexities. First, in terms of model weights, I mean, that's relatively modern.
From a storage perspective, but of course, not necessarily from a memory perspective. And so, in terms of KV cache, that really depends on the content size, how many tokens are within the context. So, I think early on, LLM started with two.
It increased to 128K. But now the latest frontier models use context sizes, maximum context sizes of 1 million. I mean, of course, this is not used right away. You know, it's when you start a session, you start essentially with kind of zero, and then as you build up your prompts in a session,
And retrieve more data from retrieval augmented generation systems. Of course, then the context then grows, and the maximum that the frontier models can tolerate right now is one million. And that leads to about 350 gigabytes per user. So.
Yeah, so that was the kind of the memory perspective. Then I wanted to talk about maybe more up level. You know, it's not just about inference and training. Let's talk about all the AI processing phases and storage workloads. Curtis had al had also very good uh introductory talks about that in the past S D C I
Recommend to look at those. So we're talking about data ingestion, then data preparation, training, inference, and archiving. What I want to add here is a bit of data in terms of what kind of scale for data storage, what kind of storage is used. Of course, it's simplified, but just to give you an idea. So for data ingestion, we're talking about
About petabyte byte scale of data. Accesses are mostly sequential. And here, object storage is primarily used, flash object tiers, maybe HTT tiers as well. So it's all about capacity. Then there's a data preparation phase. It's also petabyte scale.
About preparing the data, doing the duplication and also other trimming of the data. Throughput is important, but still, both object and capacity flash are being used here. Then, training, the active data set size is smaller, it's terabyte byte scale.
From a storage perspective, from our active working data size perspective, the bandwidth is high. We're talking parallel accesses, for example for checkpointing. And from a data storage perspective, we have PCIe attached, local drives. We also have drives that are connected via NVMe over five.
Fabric. Then, when we talk about inference, so there the picture is more complicated. I mean, you have, first of all, retrieval augmented generation systems that provide context. You have KV cache, as I mentioned, then you also may have small I/O workloads. So, here we are talking.
About terabyte scale models in context. It's latency sensitive. We're talking about local and shared NVMe tiers. And then the final step is archiving. So it's about archiving, you know, kind of training data, synthetic generated data. Again, we're talking about petabytes.
Scale, it's sequential, object storage, and HD details are being used. I want to talk here about the compute hierarchy in a data center. So we start kind of with a super chip consisting typically nowadays of two GPUs and one CPU. You have one compute tray.
That's like one drawer in a rack. There's four GPUs, two CPUs. Then you have multiple racks. That's a compute node. It's connected via a scale-up network. It's cache-coherent. So typically 72 GPUs. And then what happens? What are the additional groupings? So, what happens then?
racks are grouped together, for example eight racks to a pod. That is connected via scale out. Then several pods then can form a whole cluster. So here we talk about a data hall, they use a shared software orchestrator that can scale up to 10,000 of GPUs.
And then finally, you have the whole campus, the AI factory, that may scale up to hundreds of thousands of GPUs. And what you see here is also the respective GPU memory that is typical with current systems. You see here also a block diagram of this, you know, where what you should
Shown here is a compute node. So think of this as one full rack. One rack nowadays has 72 GPUs, as I said, they're connected via GPU with a scale-out network. You also have DRAM, you have HBM, you have CPU, you have PCI switches, and of course you have locally attached SSDs via PCI switch.
Attached to the PCA switch and can be, you know, can be kind of then utilized both by the CPU and the GPU. But then, you know, when you go out outside one compute rack, so you go outside via scale-out network to a remote performance.
Performance storage tier. You could also call it like a pooled, pooled performance storage tier. So that can happen first within kind of a pod, so with really kind of warm, hotter data, but it can even then go even further into the cluster, where you have then, you know.
storage that is shared across multiple multiple parts. So for this scale out network, it's performance optimized. So you need, ideally you use NVMe over RDMA or a similar scheme, for example also ultra Ethernet.
There's also Spectrum X, for example, of course, that is widely used. And then, so this is the scale-out network for the remote performance storage here. And then there's a remote capacity storage here. So that uses kind of a capacity storage network. Performance is less critical, it's all about scaling.
So, what is typically used is NVMe over TCP, you know, for block storage access. But for object storage access, of course, also S3. And kind of a newer development is also to use S3 over RDMA. And NFS is used as well. So the whole storage hierarchy.
In an AI data center, it is shown here. And you know, it starts first with a tray. A tray itself has SSDs. So typically, four to eight SSDs. I'm showing you four SSDs. You see here the typical capacity per tray. So that's usually, it's like for trans.
Transient data is a scratch, scratch space. So when we talk about KV cache, for example, for inference, the hot KV cached here can be stored here. That's the spillover from HBM or LPDDR. Then on a reg level, you know, you have these multiple.
Trace connected. You have more capacity. So again, it's for it's scratch space, it's for rack local KV cache. But then when we go to the next level, so we're talking about the pod level. So what happens here is that for one pod, let's say of eight compute racks.
You have one storage rack. So that's typically like an all-flash storage rack. It could be that has JBOFS inside, for example. Usually it utilizes NVMe over fabric RDMA, NVMe, RDMA. The typical capacity
is in uh dozens of petabytes. So for training, so that's has the active training tier, so that feeds clean data to the GPUs, it also absorbs parallel checkpoints. When we talk about inference, so the new development is to utilize this s flash storage tier for
for warm KV cache data. It can also be utilized for fast vector databases for RAC. Then when we talk about the cluster, so here we're talking about scale-out enterprise storage using NFS, flash, hybrid. The typical capacity is in the petabytes.
And it's a data staging tier. It can be used in terms of inference for the cold KV cache data for telemetry data. And then on a compass level, so here object storage is used HDD tape. We are talking about much larger capacities, exabyte scale.
So that's the data lake really for the long-term retention of training and generated data sets. So let's talk about the flash storage use cases in the AI data center. So what are those? First of all, for flash storage, you know, we have to address the performance tier. So we're talking here about
SSDs, flash controllers, they're optimized for four gigabyte performance for sequential performance. They're utilized in CPU or GPU compute nodes. They're also utilized in the remote performance tiers. They are typically for CPU-centric workloads.
They support TLC and QLC. We are talking about small to medium capacities, like terabytes per drive. And the typical form factors are E1.s and E3.S. So when we talk about the remote capacity storage tiers, so that's what is important: of course, capacity, read.
Performance. So these are again for CPU-centric workloads. They support QLC and also nearline flash. The capacities are going up here really dramatically. So there's a new form factor that is being standardized by SNEA E2. And actually, it will allow capacities that approach one peta.
Per drive. So it's quite incredible. One petabyte for one single SSD drive because it allows for 64 NAN placements. And on top of that, also the NAND flash makers, they're kind of working on higher capacity QLC flash. They call it nearline flash. And then there's also a new emerging tier.
And that's refers that's here. I want to give credit to the storage next effort. So this is w I would call it the small I.O. tier. So this is really optimized for small IOs for 512 byte accesses. So here this would be for small I/O performance tiers. So it would be, you know, possibly.
You know, it's a storage rack, you know, connected via fast fabric then to to uh to a compute node. It's for GPU-centric workloads. Um so from a SSD perspective, you know the ideally you would use low latency flash or you would use TLC flash into
Pseudo-SLC mode. The capacities here would be somewhat smaller, small to medium, terabytes per drive, simply because you use low latency or SLC type flash. And this gets me to the conclusion of this talk. So I wanted to highlight here with this talk, and I hope I gave you a sense.
Of how AI scaling is fundamentally also a storage problem. And it's because of the orders of magnitude growth in terms of parameters, tokens, checkpoints, KV cache sizes. And also, what's happening is, I mean, that inference and not training is becoming really kind of
kind of a dominant long-term storage driver. So not too many people talk really about training anymore. Everyone talks now about inference and how to address the storage pressures there. Then also one size fits all in terms of storage does not fit. You need really workload optimized tiers for training.
Inference, rock, and archival. KVCache is an example, you know, where like a remote performance tier is being optimized just for KVCache. And, you know, everything needs to be balanced: performance, capacity, endurance, latency. And then Flash and NVMe really form the back.
Of the AI data movement. So you have local and remote NVMeteers that absorb bursty parallel I/O at petabyte scale. Then you also have NVMe RDMA that enables GPU-efficient data paths at REC and pod level. And then object storage, in particular, also S3 over RDMA that, you know,
Enables cost-efficient and exabyte scale capacity. Then there are new, really new architectures. You know, I talked about new form factors such as E2. I also didn't mention that in terms of form factors, a new development is to add liquid cooling also to SSD form factors, you know, to enable more density, more performance.
Better power efficiency. And then storage offload and data path acceleration become important also to reduce CPU and GPU overhead. I didn't talk much about this here, but I'm talking here about DPUs and storage accelerators. I'm happy to talk about that more if you.
Guess, look me up here today, later. And then, you know, and then memory storage hierarchies, memory storage hierarchies also blur, you know, because when you talk about KV cache, for example, it's almost like a new memory tier, but it's really storage devices that are being used in there. So, in summary,
You really need to co-design compute, memory, storage, and networks. And storage innovations are really a critical enabler of AI for AI scale, cost, and efficiency. That's all I had for today. Thank you for your attention.
We got a couple minutes for questions. Any questions? All right. Well, thank you very much, guys. Hi, Gary.