SNIA SDC StorageAI 2026 - AiSIO: Orchestrating Storage I/O Across CPUs and Accelerators

All right, thanks for joining this session. And I'm pretty excited to talk about one of the many projects we're doing at Samsung. It's called Accelerator Integrated Storage I.O. And this session in particular is focusing on how to orchestrate storage I.O. across CPUs and
Accelerators. Now, specifically focusing on these three challenges that we've seen, where the main focus is actually up here on the software layer. So that's applications, libraries, even language runtimes, the boundaries between user and kernel space, and the cost on every I/O.
OS storage stack, how that comes in and puts a bit of latency on your I/Os. And even at the layer where we see different drivers sort of paying different costs per I/O based on the generality that they need to support and the abstractions. And also this other thing of units.
Unnecessary data copies, and I should maybe have said not necessarily unnecessary, they're there for a reason, but definitely unwanted memory copies of data bouncing through host DRAM before reaching your accelerator. And then the third thing, I think this might have been familiar to most of you, but the last thing might not be, which is basically this thing.
At the system software level, where a single device, usually exposed as PCIe, as one physical function, you can only associate a single driver to manage that in your operating system. So these things provide this sort of a funnel reduction of what's or how we can make storage available to.
Your accelerators. And most of it is due to the way that stuff has been managed today for CPUs. And the challenges just get even bigger when it comes to then feeding data from your NVMe storage into your accelerator. And that brings us to the Accelerator Integrated Storage I/O project. It started out as being accelerator integrated.
Initiated, a big focus on that. But we quickly came to realize that making sure that we have a unified way of talking about data movement and moving data around, we can't just focus on the device-initiated part. So we want to be able to support three I/O modes: one is CPU-initiated, data ends up, CPU drives.
Data ends up in host memory. CPU-initiated peer-to-peer. So the CPU is still in the driver's seat, but the data ends up in an accelerator memory. And then there's device-initiated peer-to-peer, where the data accelerator initiates the I.O., data ends up in its own memory. And a big focus on how we can preserve.
Support for files, file system, and OS control while enabling these different I/O modes. So, a big focus on interoperability over replacement. So, basically, we want to extend the existing software stack, and we want to do so in ways where we're not trading off the utilities of having existing abstractions.
We don't want to trade off performance either. And our focus is in doing this in an open source way where we're either already now targeting upstream or actually in upstream as open source projects. So that's the vision. We want to be able to have accelerators as first-class systems.
Citizens in the storage stack. And for this presentation, I'll be going through the first two things that we'll cover rather quickly. It's about where we started out with the POC last year, what the challenges were with that, and then what we're building instead, what you can do with it, what the benefits are, and where.
We're going to take this from here. So, as you're probably very familiar with, you have NVIDIA GDS out there as one way of instrumenting data movement, getting stuff from NVMe into your accelerators. There's a research project called BAM, that's a big accelerator memory project. It's one of the things that really started focusing.
Focusing on device-initiated I/O, then you have NVIDIA SCADA project, and very recently I saw that AMD announced something they called a Rockham or Rockham XIO, which is also a device-initiated I/O from the GBU. And then there's ASIO, which this talk is all about. Now, we wanted out in
Initially, to figure out what is really the problem. And this is what we saw. So benchmark in NVIDIA GDS here, especially for small I/O. And as you saw in the previous talk, small I/O is very relevant. And basically, here you have bandwidth on the y-axis, and on the x-axis, you have the I/O size.
As you scale I/O size, you amortize the cost of doing I.O. So that means you get more bandwidth as you increase your I.O. size. Another thing you can do is then scale up the amount of workers doing work. That's what you see on the other graph here. So here we go from one CPU thread up to 96. So it doesn't look great.
Single thread, small I/O, we cannot saturate even a single NVMe device using this. So that's what we set out to figure out what we can do about that. And based on the prior work of BAM, what they showed, what they could be able to do with device initiated and the work of LibNVM, we reproduced what they have been doing.
And wanted to extend that and figure out: could we also have file system support? And the way we did that was to look at two things. One is the coexistence of multiple control paths or associations with a single drive. So, looking at a single drive, that usually just exposes one file.
Physical function that you bind a driver to. That means that over here you're either talking to a kernel stack or some other user space-driven stack to talk to your device. But having physical multiple functions on your device, you can start binding multiple drivers, and by doing so, having these multiple tenants.
On one drive. And with that, we showed how we can then have the entire kernel space running with your traditional I/O and kernel manage mode, along with this tag over here that we call the ACO prototype. And in that thing, we sort of have a cache for all of the file operations. So, one essential thing.
thing of loading data from storage into your GPU is that you need to know where your files are. So, and that's the entire task of the storage operating system, of the file system. It knows the mapping from a file name down to the LBAs where the data is actually stored. So you need to extract that. That portion is tying.
Consuming, so we need a way to make that faster, and we do that by caching those address translations such that the GPU can directly go and load those LBAs into its memory. So, that was the first POC we did, and the numbers that came out of it was a comparison here between.
GDS and BAME. And here we're just doing like sort of a synthetic block I.O. And what we wanted to see that we could match when doing a workload that is entirely block I.O., we match what BAME did. And we could do, and you see the trouble here with GDS down here.
And this is 96 threads, and over here you have one thread. So that sort of paints the picture of the trouble of those existing solutions. Now, what we then enabled was the file support. So here we have file throughput compared on three different workloads: one is small files, and then larger and larger data.
Sets. So, of course, as larger the files are, the lower the benefit is, but it's pretty clear that it is possible to reduce some of that bottlenecks that were related to what we saw with the prior work, and we can get those things to cooperate. However, there are a bunch of challenges we needed to address with that.
That POC stack. And it's a lot about the code base is used and how they interoperated with the open source stack. And we wanted something that could move forward in a way that would be compliant and something we could upstream. We also had challenges at the stuff that we added with regards to file extents and looking up those things. So we wanted to.
Address that as well. So, jumping into it, what we came from was this infrastructure where we used libn VM and these custom kernel patches and that exclusive device ownership. So, the main component now is this thing called Homi, the host-orchestrated multi-path IO daemon.
That's the control plane that sits at the host. It brings up everything and makes sure that you have the multiple I/O paths available. And then a small component here with UDM APUF import that lets us get access to the physical addresses on the GPU memory. And then expanding this.
with all three IO modes. So that brings us to here we're just recapping what we had before. The interfaces we used that interface directly specifically with CUDA and the NVIDIA kernel driver and this libnVM kernel module. And we had like bundled everything into a single process.
Having a single process has of course a lot of challenges since that's not really the use case out there. You have a ton of different processes that needs to access files and need to make sure that data are actually running into your GPU. So the first thing we do is split that up. And that's the the homie daemon. That's the control plane running on your host.
It does through this library called the extend access library. That's where it caches all of that extend info. And a major thing that changed here is that previously we went through and directly decoded the XFS on disk format. That's a bit brittle to do that, and it doesn't really scale well since we had to do this for every file size.
System out there. Fortunately, the kernel has a very neat feature of FireMap, where we can just ask the kernel where your things are lying. So that was one thing we could then do. And then have that efficiently cached inside of our homie daemon. And then for other user space processes,
Need to access this, they can then do that now and talk to the daemon to get the state of the user space drivers up and running. And the thing they need to talk with the kernel to do this are the existing UIO, PCI generic, and VFIO PCI. And then we have a small tiny layer here with an iOctal that taps into the DMA buffer.
interface and UDMA buff interface. And with that, we can talk with the driver for the accelerator that supports the DMA buff export interface, get that so we can get the addresses where we need to form our DMA to be performed directly to the accelerator.
Then this works well once your storage device supports ESR IOV or another way of having multiple functions on your storage device. But we want to be able to deploy this even further. And that's where we can make use of UBlock. So the UBlock infrastructure in the Linux kernel gives us a way to implement the block device driver.
In a way where we then tap into that user space control plane on the kernel and then down again for the setup of all of the drivers that's running inside of user space. And by doing this, we can sort of have either go the hardware-assisted route or we can do something that is running based on.
On software, when the device only supports a single physical function. Now, just a brief overview with the new ACO open source implementation. It consists of a bunch of open source projects, different components, you might say. And what's showing here is
Just the names of these things, and the blue ones are stuff that already exists. These purple, or sorry, these orange ones are stuff we either had to add or extend the existing versions of. And I'll just be going briefly through what these different projects are. So, XNReme is a user-space library.
That encapsulates a bunch of different I/O interfaces on different platforms. And it has been extended with these ACO primitives such that we can use anywhere XMME is integrated, we can then make use of these new I/O paths. XMMEperf was a tool we needed, and I'll come back later.
We needed to do this. That allows us to, with minimal overhead, do some very simple I/O patterns. And you can see it running over here where it's executing I/O either through the CPU-initiated path or the device-initiated path. And UPCE is a small module.
That gives us the primitives to do MMIO in a convenient way, both on the CPU and on an accelerator. And we sort of needed a place where we could have an abstraction over these small primitives. So that's the thing that allows us to ring the doorbell on a PCAE device, and we want to encapsulate that in a way such that it.
It's easier to build drivers on top, whether that's in user space on the host or on an accelerator inside of the kernel language for that accelerator. And then the main thing that sort of enables us to tap into the DMA-buff infrastructure of the Linux kernel.
Is this small thing here? It's not upstream. It's something we want to engage with the Linux kernel community today. But it is, we've made it openly available so we could get some feedback on how we can proceed with this. There's the extend access library. That's the component that sort of tries to abstract how we're getting.
The extend information. And initially, we did the raw decode, which was not optimal. We then did the FileMap backend, and now we're looking at doing FileMap plus eBPF traces, such that we can capture not just, so basically, when we do FileMap, we also need to know when data changes. Then we can use inotify.
When iNotify happens, you have another issue of then requesting file map afterwards. But we're looking into maybe being able to get ePPF running such that we can get the notification of these changes. Let's do that afterwards, Christophe. There is a proper way to do it, and I call for two years to multiple members in your team.
That's great. Let's talk about that afterwards. No, I I mean why are you claiming is a good idea when your team knows how freaking dangerous this is? That's one opinion.
What we also have is a benchmarking tool called FieldPath. It's all about doing benchmarking at the file level, such that we compare, can compare PASIX as well as the GGSQ file interfaces, as well as doing the same thing with the ACO infrastructure.
We also touched a bit on the diagram about how Homi fits into this, so I won't dive into the details of that. It's either the uBlock approach of the isolation and multiple functions for binding drivers, or there's going through uBlock. That's sort of the two ways of doing that. Then there's the UBlock server.
A bunch of these things are also done in a way such that it'll be easy to others to pick up the work and reproduce it. And then that's done with something called CHO. You can think of that as, you know, if you're familiar with Ansible and other provisioning tools, it's a bit down that road. And in general, the ACO is a project where.
We're trying to do stuff in a way that'll be reproducible. So we have claims here, stuff we're showing, benchmarks, things we're doing. You can reproduce them and see that where those numbers came from. We've put out a white paper and an SDK, so you can also experiment with it. So now let's dive into these.
Four experiments. Where using ACO, we'll be looking at establishing a CPU-initiated baseline. Actually, for this thing, we're looking at something that wasn't ACO, but what people usually do. And then these are the experiments that I'll go through. Now, first off, we're looking
At these 16 NVMe drives in a system. And since we're only interested in seeing what the cost is of CPU processing or processing of IOPS in general, we're using these in an unallocated fashion. That's basically when you just run NVMe LPA format. So the drive spends less time since it's
Doesn't actually have to go to the media to fetch the data, it can return much sooner. And by doing that, we can get 3.8 million from these drives. It's a Dell server, and it's been hosted in something called Samsung Memory Research Center. And we're looking at, we've been doing this parameter suite, looking at CPU governor, turbo boost.
Things you enable and disable in your BIOS, things you tweak in the kernel, QDEP, call count, all of these things. And the sweet spot we end up with here, and what we're using here is HPDK and something called their benchmarking tool called BDEFPerf. And we hit the 62 million IOPS here with eight CPU calls. So that's 16 devices.
That gets saturated by using eight CPU cores. So that's right around 7.7 million I/Os per core. There is some variation you saw in the plot that can be attributed to NUMA effects. And the one good thing about this is that it scales linearly.
One to two, and there's something to be said about the different things you have to tweak to get these numbers. But we really wanted to figure out: can we do better? Like, could we free up all of these calls? We're spending eight CPU calls, that's quite a lot. So, what can be done about that?
And for that, we wanted to look both at the application layer and at the driver layer. So SPDK provides BDEVPerf. It also provides NVMeperf, another tool. BDEVPerf has the abstraction layer of a block layer. NVMeperf does not. And then there's this other tool we did called XMMEPerf. So let's take a look at that.
So PDF perf here, a single CPU, a single hardware thread, 6.3 million. And then with two hardware threads, 7.4 million. And using three hardware threads on two CPU cores, it gets 16 million. So that's pretty much what we saw before. Now using NVMe perf, so
That's the exact same NVMe driver, but now we have tweaked that B dev perf. The B dev layer has now been cut off. So this is just a small tweak at the application level, and you can see some quite dramatic effects from that. And now you also see why we then did XMMEperv, because we saw we can tweak some of these things even further.
And with XMMEperf, it taps through XMME using the same driver as SPDK, and we get again just a little bit more. So, this is trigging application layer logic for doing random read workloads. And these are basically the results. So, you ultimately here with three hardware threads, you get.
32 million IOPS. So that's application layer tweaking. Then we wanted to see. So this was the SPDK in MIME driver. What if we tweak the driver itself using these UPZAE tooling? Well, then we end up even further. So a single hardware thread now can do around 40 million IOPS. And over here,
With a single CPU core, two hardware threads, we get very close to 50 million IOPS just by tweaking the application layer and the driver layer. And at this point, here we get bottlenecked by that we simply cannot put any more devices into this system. So
So, yeah, that's pretty much. I think I got through the takeaways from that is that by triggering the application and the driver layers, you can get a lot more out of the storage stack than if, yeah, that's the main purpose. Like, there's overhead that is a
Incurred at every layer that affects latency, and that ultimately affects how many IOPS you can push through your system. So by removing that, you get more efficient system utilization. So in this case, we went from these eight cores to reach 62 million down to 1.5.
And that's all good, but we really need our data to get into the accelerator. And for that, we need to do something else. And what you saw before, data landed in host memory, we need that data to land on the GPU. So for that, the ACO system has CBU initiated IO.
With peer-to-peer data movement and then device-initiated I.O. with the peer-to-peer data movement. And let's have a look at how that stuff is doing. So just remember this graph here, data lands in host memory. We need it to go to the GPU or accelerator without paying an additional cost.
And that's what we see here. You're running the XMME perf tool using the peer-to-peer mode. And what you see then is that data just lands the exact same place. The cost of the CPU utilization is the same. So, what we don't have in the slides here is showing what the added cost would be to do the data copy from host.
Down to the accelerator. But that's sort of not the point here. The point is that the NVMe drive doesn't really care that the DMA address is on your host memory or on your GPU. The cost of processing that I/O is the same. And then when we add the mode where the IO
Is initiated on the device side, well, we land in the same place here. So, of course, for this number, there's a lot more to the story. We're not using CPU resources anymore, and here we're not talking about how many GPU resources we are processing for this. We basically just want to demonstrate that it's a it's currently possible.
It's very recent, but it's in the infrastructure now. And the reason why you see here that it's the same is that, well, it's unrelated to the use of CPU processing. That sort of brings us to, yeah, basically both of these paths reach the same ceiling that we had.
Before, now data just ends up on your GPU without paying any extra cost for doing that. Then we have peer-to-peer bandwidth. So, so far we've been focusing on IOPS because we wanted to look at that issue we saw initially.
The cost of doing very small I/O, that's an issue we needed to solve. So, all of our focus has been on reaching a higher mind of IOPS and doing efficient, doing stuff efficiently at that level. But for a lot of other AI workloads, bandwidth is also a very relevant concern where it is feasible that the I/O size does increase.
And by that, once you look at that, then you see here a single GPU, and on the left we have three MME devices. And with on the graph, here you have the I/O size and then bandwidth up here. Now, at a very small I/O size, we're not saturating.
The bandwidth. As soon as we go up to 4K, three drives can easily be saturated, can easily saturate the PCE Gen5 link of this GPU. And increasing the payload side even further doesn't really add a benefit. And adding up the fourth GPU, sorry, the fourth NVMe drive doesn't really.
Really give you much. So, the main takeaway from that is really that there's another big challenge, which is we've been looking at software overhead, unnecessary data copies, and the challenge of getting all of this stuff to interoperate. But there's also a big challenge in terms of like a PCI.
Protocol overhead. And that's really what goes to waste here. So intuitively, you might think that a by 16 GPU should be able to use four by four NVMe drives, but due to protocol overhead, you actually only need three. And looking at this, you can extrapolate that.
Since you need at 4K, you need much less I/O, then with these efficiencies of IO, at 4K you can saturate on a single CBU, saturate eight GPUs in terms of bandwidth. And that sort of brings me closer to the end.
Here, where what we wanted to demonstrate was this vision of being able to integrate the accelerators into the storage stack. And as you heard, there are clear objections from Christoph, and I think we can discuss and see how we can address those. But in general, what we're looking at is having these different I/O modes and see how.
can integrate them with the existing software stack and figuring out what are the challenges. There are the advantages of doing IO very efficiently in a way where file systems, files and OS still exist and these fast paths are executing on the side. And it's all open source and either already upstream or targeting upstream.
And on top of that, yeah, have a look at it. We just have some new device initiated experiments that I think uh have some pretty exciting numbers in them. And the source code is available and so uh is the white paper that goes into greater detail on what we've been doing and what we'll be doing from here on out.
So yeah, I think that's that's it for me. So I hope you have uh questions. Um you really, really cannot use FIEMAP. It's a debugging tool. It has different content for different file systems. It's a massive risk.
For filestem corruption due to concurrent activity. That's why I told everyone, including your boss, two years ago, you need to extend the PNFS block layout layouts that have all the mechanisms to deal with that, including a relocation mechanism, a fencing mechanism for dependent clients.
Thank you, Christophe. So I think that was more a comment than uh than a question. And uh I think we'll take that into consideration. We also see a lot of benefits with stuff like PNF and the flex files and putting that as the management
And the abstraction layer for these things. So we're not using a file map. But we're definitely exploring what's out there and what's possible. And then, yeah, any other questions?
Thanks, Michael. In the performance benchmarks that you've been providing, the metrics that you've provided, are these files dynamically allocated or are these files provisioned ahead of time, so they're fixed size? Yeah, they're provisioned ahead of time.
Stuff that you saw here. So specifically, we had just preloaded the ImageNet data set, the TikTok data set, and just some.
Large 8 gigabyte files. So pre-allocated, and we are not looking at write workloads, entirely looking at how we can get this access to these files from a GPU.
Okay. Other questions? Oh, yeah. Are these files accessed sequentially only or are they random accessed?
In a data loader workload. So we took inspiration for that part from DALI to be able to do a comparison to the NVIDIA DALI framework where they use files as in a data loader benchmark. So basically, just making sure all of those images of cats are available to do whatever analysis you need when you analyze.
Images of cats and so forth. Thank you. Okay, thank you.