SNIA SDC StorageAI 2026 - AI Storage Workloads: What is Different and Impacts on SSD Design

Hi, I'm Rory Bolt. I'm a senior fellow at Keyokesha and I lead the technology and storage pathfinding group. The reason I say that is because I'm responsible for looking at things past the end of our published roadmaps and as such the things I'm going to be covering.
In this presentation, unless I specifically say so, are all forward-looking and not necessarily going to ever hit real production, right? So, there are some things I'll talk about that may or may not hit production. Some things I'll identify that are actually happening, okay?
So as a backdrop, this is kind of late in the afternoon. You've seen a lot of these things already. Some things I'm going to go quite quickly over, but some of them I think are going to be new and interesting. No surprise to anyone, you've seen Transformer and
Attention is all that matters, referenced several times today. And it really had an impact on AI and the size of the data sets being used by AI. Now, I first used this slide at
Future of memory storage last year. It's been actually updated since then. So they've published out data through the end of 2025 now. And no surprise, that 2.5x per year growth, it's now higher. It's now 2.8x per year.
Amazing things happening with storage demand, right? But there has been a shift, and you've heard this referred to today, too. There's a shift from training to inference, and that's where we see the real growth. And hopefully, this is.
Now, this is all coming from various industry analysts, and it's forward-looking, and so take it all with a grain of salt. But the trend is growth focusing on inference. And why? It's because that's how you monetize AI.
It's all well and good to train these models. And it's sort of amazing to me that these models, which are trained at great expense in terms of tens of thousands of GPUs running for months and months and months, are then given away in some cases. Pretty phenomenal.
Circumstance in our industry, but sooner or later, someone wants to make money. The way to do that is with inference, and that's again driving tremendous demand for storage and bit growth in the NAND industry.
The other thing that you've heard repeatedly is there isn't a single AI workload, right? There are many different AI workloads. And because of that, we actually see fragmentation of the market. It's not a one-size-fits-all.
The very high end, we have something that's being introduced by NVIDIA, the Storage Next, which is looking for extreme IO rates. And we'll talk more about that in a couple of slides, right? You have KV caching, been mentioned many times today, right? That is primarily
Traditional storage, but some differences that that we'll hit on in a couple more slides. The growth of these data sets is driving the need for high density QLC devices. And then at the very low end of the spectrum,
The growth of the data in AI has led to a situation that is frankly phenomenal in the NAND industry and the storage industry in general. We are out of storage, right? Try and buy a hard disk or a
SSD in any sort of volume today, and you'll be hit with a that's nice, we're sold out. Yeah, so that said, there is an end, a need at the low end to grow density.
and drive down costs, contrary to the current pricing trends. We're not going to go into that. But long term, we see a need for a new class of storage at the low end to actually address essentially what's happening.
Is hard disks have stalled out in terms of I/O density. They can increase the amount of storage on a hard disk, but they can't increase the IOPS per terabyte. That's been actually going down. So we do see a split up of the market here.
Okay. Now with respect to AI workloads, you know, I'm going to go a little bit more into StorageNext and what that looks like. The basic idea is to be able to address workloads that are too large to fit into AI.
HBM. So the idea is that you can load a gigantic data set onto an SSD and then have the GPU directly access that SSD and pick out small pieces of data that it needs to operate on.
The problem here is that in these workflows, you don't know what's going to be required next. It's sort of given your current state, you determine the next thing you need, and then you move to the new state, and then you determine the new next thing you need.
A random I/O workload that's focused on very small accesses. They're settling in at optimizing around 512 bytes. And they're looking to feed about 200 million 512-byte random read IOPS per GPU. And so this is.
A tremendous I.O. problem. We see another use case that is coming about, and it's a different form of near-GPU caching. And this is essentially trying to drive efficiency.
In the networking infrastructure of the data centers, it's very inefficient to do small accesses across very high-speed networks. And so the basic concept here is to do large bulk transfers from your data.
Lakes into relatively local SSD devices and then do the small operations to feed into the HBM through the GPU from that local copy of the data. This use case difference from this and the previous one of storage next is.
These are not the five twelve byte random reads, and it tends to be CPU-initiated, not GPU-initiated. Final thing, you saw this too: the CMX announcement from.
NVIDIA is driving a whole new class, a whole new tier of storage. Purely, it appears to us anyway to be a purely additive storage tier driving demand for devices. And so, with that all as a backdrop, I want to get into how we see this.
Affecting our devices themselves, okay? So, you know, we see some very high-level trends, right? The need for 512-byte random read optimizations, increased endurance. Many of these.
Applications, the CMX application in particular, it's a caching application, right? That data lives on that device for hours, days, maybe a couple of weeks. But it ages out in terms of storage, it ages out very, very quickly and gets overwritten by
And so these workloads in these environments are tending to be more write-intensive than traditional workloads. And so there's a drive towards higher endurance. High Q depths. This is one of the amazing things.
That we saw when we first started working with NVIDIA on the StorageNext initiatives. The GPUs can drive queue depths in the tens of thousands of I/Os in microseconds. You can go from an idle device.
To having 10,000 commands, 20,000 commands in your submission queues in microseconds. It's pretty phenomenal to watch. And there are some things that we need to do to deal with that within the devices themselves. Liquid cooling, you've heard by now that.
That the Vera Rubin platform is moving towards liquid cooling device designs. Strictly speaking, many of the SSD applications and workloads don't require liquid cooling yet, but we
See a trend, particularly in the neo-cloud environments, where they're building entirely new data centers that are designed from the ground up to be tailored to AI workloads, not general-purpose compute workloads. And in those environments, since they are doing the production.
Amount of their power and cooling is focused on the GPUs, they're going all liquid. No air cooling whatsoever. Because even though you don't require air cooling for the SSDs in some of these cases, it's much more efficient at the data center level.
Layer or level to be either all liquid or all air. Mix of liquid and air is sort of the worst case scenario for them. You may have also heard talk about multi-initiator access. There was a session on TP for.
4217. Again, this is having some impact on controller design. I'll get into that in a couple of slides too. And then larger capacities and what we have to do within the devices to handle these larger capacities. Okay? So with respect to the 512-byte random read.
Optimizations. This is leading to new ECC layouts in the media itself, right? Because we tend to organize our current drives around 4K pages, and you don't want to have to read in.
All 4K to do the ECC correction on the media to service a 512-byte access. So we're looking into new C ECC layouts. We should say that even though the
Read access pattern is centered around being able to do 512-byte reads. We don't necessarily want to go to 512-byte IU size because in many of these workloads, particularly the case where you're loading in a very large data set.
To perform these random read operations on, the write workload isn't small random writes. It's actually large sequential writes. So again, just because you're doing 512-byte random read optimization doesn't mean you need to go all the way down to a 512-byte interview.
Direction unit size. And then there are the concurrency requirements to feed these GPUs. If you're going to try and get each GPU 200 million IOPS, there are many ways to do that. You can do that with a lot of drives that are relatively modest in performance.
You can do that with a smaller number of drives that are very, very high performance. I'm just going to take a hypothetical case here and say you want 25 million IOPS out of your device, right? Roughly speaking, you do the quick math, one over 25 million, and you get 40 nanoseconds.
Seconds per I.O. is your budget there. Well, we can't do that with flash technology, right? It just doesn't happen. And so I've taken two, again, hypothetical, because you're not going to get any confidential information, sorry.
A hypothetical T read time for the media itself of 45 microseconds, which is somewhat representative. To achieve 25 million IOPS, you'd have to overlap or pipeline over a thousand parallels.
IOs or die activations. And if you had a faster media, say at 25 microseconds, then you'd only have to do 625 pipelined IOs. And I just wanted to, you know, I don't know how many people really understand.
Going on within the drives themselves of how we achieve these speeds. It's not that the media is fast, but it's not that fast. And so we have to deeply pipeline things. And this next slide is just an illustration, and again, it's conceptual, but
It's sort of conveying the thing. We don't actually schedule the die axis in this way, but you could have a mental model that this is what we're doing. That, you know, okay, to get that completion every 40 nanoseconds to achieve.
25 million IOPS, we're launching one of these 45 microsecond reads every 10 nanoseconds and pipelining a thousand of them or 1,100 of them. This is the sort of thing that's going on inside the device itself.
With respect to increased endurance, I've mentioned it already. These workloads are different, right? And we do see a higher write-to-read ratio in many of them. And it varies between the different stages and phases of the pipeline.
AI. And so this is driving a lot of people towards investigating pseudo-SLC and pseudo-MLC designs, single-level cell or multi-level cell, two bits or one bit per cell. And you can increase endurance by doing this.
One thing that people don't necessarily realize is you can also do this by massive over-provisioning, right? In a sense, if you take a media that was designed for TLC applications or three
levels per cell and you run it in pseudo-SLC mode, you're doing 300% over-provisioning, right? You've taken conceptually.
you're massively, it's equivalent to massively over-provisioning. So if you take a three terabyte drive and you say, I'm only going to use one terabyte of it, it'll drastically increase the endurance of that device in a manner that's similar to what PSLC would do.
I already hit upon this a little bit. Caches versus long-term storage really have a much different demand in terms of endurance. And so we are seeing requests
From different customers that are asking for three drive rights per day, which is something that was standard for a while and then fell out of favor. It's coming back into favor again. To some people, want 100 drive rights per day. So very easy.
Interesting trends going on within the devices themselves. I mentioned those extreme queue depths, and I didn't mention, but I should also add to that: it's not just a single queue with tens of thousands of IOs in it. They're happy.
To consume a thousand queues and put 10,000 requests in each one of them per device. So it's leading to changes in the way we are trying to schedule operations and service.
cues within the controllers themselves. And again, if you've had thousands of IOs submitted into your submission queues, head-of-line blocking becomes a
A very big issue, right? If there is something that you need to take priority, you need to make some provisions for that. Now, there are solutions to these things, very solutions to these problems, but these are all factors that we see changing the
Design of the SOCs and the SSDs in the future that are being driven by these AR workloads. And then the last thing is: you know, with very high queue depths, your overall latencies, your end-to-end latencies, get
Quite large, and this is one of the things that the GPUs are effective at masking: latency. So we're seeing a lot of concentration on not focusing on the overall latency, but on the catalog.
Consistency of latency as it affects these different AI workloads. Mentioned earlier, this drive towards liquid cooling stole some of my own thunder by saying it's all about the data center efficiency.
But there are several things that we see happening in the SSD design related to this. The higher the number of dies you light up at the same time to drive those really high IOPS figures, each die consumes power. And so we're looking
At next generation drives that might be in the 40 to 50 watt range. And if you wanted to go crazy and go to 100 million IOPS, which is feasible in an SSD, you might be looking at close to 80 or to 100 watts, right?
So liquid cooling is a given as far as I'm concerned. And the question there at the end is is it's going to lead to a standardization or design on the SSDs because there are standards that are converging on single-side cold plate solutions which will tend
To drive everyone to put their SOCs on the same side of the PCB and various other things that may actually influence the overall SSD market's design parameters. Multi-initiator access, this is that TPE.
4217 again, looking at leases on LBA ranges, mapping those leases back to initiators to control access. The only thing I'm really going to point out here is, well, maybe not the only thing, this is on the fast path of I.O.
the SOC. And the fast path is hardware accelerated in all modern SSDs. We're not able to drop down into firmware. And so there's a direct silicon cost to these lease implementations.
That's a function of how many leases you're going to simultaneously support. So, a small number of leases, it's practical. Where it gets sort of interesting, and we do see some paths forwards here, is if you have to deal with file system fragmentation, which could
Potentially lead to a large number of leases or large number of ranges being required to represent a single large file. The final thing on here is data protection. I put it on here just because I wonder about it, it doesn't really fit.
Us and the SOCs and the SSDs so much, but when you have a device that's shared between a file system and a GPU, and the GPU is writing to it, most file systems have certain requirements on resiliency of the
Of the data, and they're built upon layers of data protection, whether that's RAID constructs or whether the file system has its own ECC checking. And if you're bypassing the file system on these rights, I think that there's.
Going to be some interesting discussions around how you ensure the data resiliency for the file systems themselves. Larger capacities, again, we see this data growth trend. We also see
Desire for PSLC and PMLC applications, and of course, those are taking larger devices to create the effective capacities that you want for PSLC. Interesting thing here is that it actually is something that many
Of our customers are looking for as a mechanism to minimize their SKUs. So, if they need a high-endurance drive and they need a high-capacity drive, they can order the same drive and just configure it at provisioning time to be either TLC or PSLC. That's a big win for them and it actually drives economies to.
Scales along with that, too. So it's all good stuff that is being considered for future drives. So I mentioned that pretty much everything I'm talking about is forward-looking. This slide is a mix of forward-looking and as well as something.
This plan of record. We do have a drive that we're announced that is plan of record going to be sampling at the end of this year. And it's targeting 10 million IOPS at 25 watts. It's leveraging a special type of media called Excel Flash.
XL Flash is not like PSLC. It is specifically designed for low latency, and so it has many different physical attributes at the cell level that enable it to be low latency and high endurance.
Taking a TLC-type media and operating in PCLC mode cannot do. And again, the other thing it has is many, many planes. So the current generation has 16 planes on each die. And so that has an impact on scheduling and the SOCs.
Two, we do believe that it's possible to reach 100 million IOPS on a single SSD in the 2027 timeframe. We're not sure if we're going to do that. And so I'm going to be wrapping things up here rapidly, but we have a high-speed emulator that we're using to model.
These extreme performance devices we can model up to currently, publicly we're saying that we can do 142 million IOPS on our emulator. And what we're doing is using this high-speed emulation in conjunction with StorageNext.
In the SCADA software stack, and we're running, we're starting to run real end-to-end experiments. And so, using that, we're trying to determine what the next generation after the 10 million IOPS drive should be. This is kind of an
Chart, but the emulator allows us to inject latency curves so that we can model different types of media and different behaviors and see the effects in raw throughput. But as CJ pointed out in his StorageNext presentation, we're actually
Actually, able to compare end-to-end against a particular workload. In this case, it was comparing a whole graph workload with two simulated drives, both capable of 10 million IOPS, but with different media characteristics that have.
Had different latency curves associated with them. And the net net of this was that with lower latency SSDs, you can reach the full throughput 10 million IOPS with less GPU concurrency. What that translates to is every workload.
Is data-dependent and workload-dependent. With lower latency media, you can address a broader set of workloads. If you have enough concurrency, you can hide the latency because they're very effective at doing that, but not every workload has the required amount.
Of concurrency in it. So we're trying to experiment and see where the sweet spot is to drive the next generation of SSD devices. And then the final slide that I have for you, you've also heard this mentioned too, is with every generation.
Of PCIe, we're doubling the data rates, and we're almost halving the trace lengths that are feasible in these devices. And so we see that there's going to be a cutoff point where we're going.
Have to go optical for all intents and purposes. It's probably not a coincidence that NVIDIA invested $4 billion in two photonics companies about a month ago. As you get faster and faster, you're going to need to go optical. We think we're not.
Sure, we think maybe in the PCIe Gen 8 timeframe is when this is going to make sense. But we're not there yet. But we do have prototypes up and running of PCIe over optical transceivers in anticipation of this. And so hopefully this is.
Sort of an informative overview of the things that are being considered in the effects that AI is having on SSD design. And with that, I'm done. Thank you.
So, Bird of the Feather session for the last four authors, including Rory, will be over in the other room. And on your way out, push the little feedback button on the display by the door there. And thank you all for your time. Look forward to seeing you over the Bird of Feather session.
M