From Training Titans to Inference for Billions_ Open Infrastructure for the Next Era of AI

Good morning, OCP. How are we doing today? Everybody had a good start to the day? It's a quiet crowd. I do have a point on this where I'm going to ask you to stand up or raise your hand, so there may be some exercise involved here. But what I want to talk about today is: how are we going?
Going to progress in the future from really kind of the title, right? From Training Titans to Interference for Billions. How are we going to use open infrastructure in this next era of AI to really do that? And I think to get started, need to have a little step back in time. Everybody thinks AI is what, a year, two years ago.
Five years old. You know, this was actually researched back in the 50s by Alan Turing, some of the original research. And if you think about the journey the industry had to go on from the 1950s, 75 years later, this is probably the slowest tech adoption curve we've ever seen from, you know, when it was first stipulated or researched.
But if you look at all the problems that we had to solve in the industry, first we had to get off of vacuum tubes to transistors, we had to invent semiconductors, we had to invent the CPU, we had to invent DRAM. Somewhere along the way, we had to invent storage, and then we had to connect it together with networking, and then we had to figure out how to do data centers. And it's been a long journey.
It's been a 75-year journey up to this point. It feels like a hockey stick, and it certainly is. But if you really step back and think about the time and all the steps that we've had to progress, we still have a lot of those same steps ahead of us. They're just nuanced and a little different. And so, if we talk about inference for billions, what does this mean?
Really shifting, scaling intelligence from the initial wave was around these foundational models, large training models. You've seen a lot of the different folks talk about Gemini and how big they are. But if we're going to have inference for billions, it's not going to just be the jumbo giant foundational. We're going to have a large scale.
Of AI, from the smallest device to the largest device, to very specific models to very complex models. And OCP is going to play a critical role here, not just for the Titans, but for everybody. If we're going to really scale this to billions and billions of users around the world. And so we've got to collaborate.
You know, OCP has been a great foundational place to bring us together to collaborate. And again, if we talk about the first wave of AI, it really started with the hyperscaler GPU clusters, the foundational models. We all had the chat GPT moment that went hockey stick, and we've been on that hockey stick.
And it was very centralized data centers that were very, very specialized to do that foundational training. But that did limit some of the flexibility to how many people could embrace training or iference, because it was very centralized in a few big data centers. And so that was really the first wave. We're starting to shift, you know, the
Gravity is shifting now towards this, you know, from training to inference, right? It's moving to training models. You know, we're still always going to have training models. We're always going to need training. But if we're going to have inference for billions, we have to start thinking about the global distribution importance, data sovereignty, power restrictions.
In different parts of the world. Not everybody's going to stand up a megawatt data center, a megawatt rack. So we have to think broader. And so we have to think about the new infrastructure priorities to enable that. And inference is really a different problem. You know, it's more cost-focused, tokens per dollar, it's more of
Throughput efficiency, it's about real time, it's about data, processing the data. Now, I, for one, you know, if I'm happy to know that, you know, the drive-the-way mode is in the world, but I'm kind of happy that the intelligence is in the car and not across some cellular link somewhere deciding to turn left or right before it hits the purpose.
Or something, so I'm kind of glad that it's at the edge of the car. But that means also we have to get operational efficiency. And operational efficiency is not just the energy, the sustainability, but supply chain. You know, part of the operational to deploy and to use, we've got to make sure we have a diverse supply chain. How many people right now would like?
To have less DRAM manufacturers. Anybody? I think we'd all like to see a little bit more right now. We'd like to see more competition, more supply. And so we have to get to this scalable and flexible infrastructure, exactly what Amber was talking about, you know, for the large training side. And we have to make sure that we work together to.
Avoid closed systems. We have to limit our embracing of the closed systems because, at the end of the day, they don't scale. You've all heard the saying: if you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together. That's what OCP is all about. We have to go far if we're going to reach billions to every corner of the world. And there's huge advantages to these open.
Systems. And what I wanted to highlight from an AMB standpoint is: you know, what do you get with open? So, we've talked publicly about our Helios rack that's coming and the NQ3. But what I wanted to highlight is we didn't invent everything, we actually leveraged a ton of stuff from OCP. Yes, we have some new contributions.
Be making when it that we'll be making. But if you look at the list, right, we have, you know, there's from everything from open OpenRack-wide to the quick connects to the DCS-CM to the OCP-NIC to OCP-SAFE for security, OpenSIL for firmware. We've leveraged.
We didn't have to reinvent the wheel. We actually got to leverage a lot of your work. And so, my exercise for you: how many of you were involved in any of these projects? Raise your hand. Anyone? Well, I want to thank you all. Thank you for helping us accelerate innovation in the industry by bringing it together.
You know, the point is: while it's great to work on shiny new contributions and continue to innovate, leveraging work that's already been done is what OCP is about. Yes, we can go work on new items and bring it into the market, but leveraging so we can go faster is how we're going to get it to billions and billions. And so we were.
Able to use, you know, 16. I know there's more, that's about all I could fit before I shrunk the text. But we leveraged a ton of OCP so we didn't have to reinvent the wheel. And what did we achieve? What did we achieve with OCP and all that leverage in Helios? We made a new rock scale architecture. This is
You know, it's a big boy rock scale. It's an OR-wide. It's about 7,000 pounds. It's about 300 kilowatts. So it's not for the faint of heart. But it's for that foundational training and large, large-scale inference. But we were able to leverage many industry standards, right? We used our InfinitiLink fabric between our CP.
UGPU for that cache coherency. That one's not open. That one's an AMD proprietary. But we were able to donate part of that into the ecosystem for the UA link over Ethernet for our scale up network. We were able to use UEC for the scale out network. And we were able to connect our AI NIC on that UA link.
That we could actually get more bandwidth with less lanes because UA-Link runs faster than PCIe. So, again, we were able to leverage these standards. And that's been able to let us do co-hardware software design. So, for day zero, we come out of the box with optimized models. And the proof is in the pudding here. I mean, we've got 72 GPUs.
In this Helios rack, 260 terabytes a second aggregate bandwidth, you know, for this big load store shared memory pool between all the GPUs to work on the biggest models and the smallest models of inference at the same time. And you know, this is great, but the world is not always going to just embrace.
That rack scale. There are other users of inference. And in the industry, we've had kind of two other form factors that have been embraced for that sub-rack category. Not everything, liquid cooling is definitely going to be needed and some of the biggest, but there's still a lot of environments, a lot of enterprises.
A lot of edge that are going to need air-cooled solutions. And we've been embracing, you know, the 600-watt Chem or the UBBOAM form factor. And I would argue that the PCI Chem is going to continue. I mean, that's the standard interface for volume, high-volume servers. That's going to continue. On the UBBOAM, A and B.
Has been embracing that openness for a number of generations, but it's really run out of steam. There's a lot of challenges with the form factor, the shadowing of the GPUs make air cooling almost impossible. There's, you know, it's challenging, it's running out of steam. So I'm happy to say that, you know.
Now, we've been working with some other partners in the industry that you'll get to see a session on today for the first time. We kicked off a project in OCP called Oak, or the Open Adapter Card. And the way to think about this is: this is basically just a vertical OAM. We took the limitations of the OAM and flipped it vertically. So we get some.
De height relief. We get rid of the shadow GPU. We get rid of cable flyover and power delivery problems. And we've been working with Intel, AMD, NVIDIA, Qualcomm, and Dell in a private work stream that we discussed tomorrow at on the 30th at what is that?
155. Well, we'll do a deeper dive into how this is progressing and our goal of getting a 1.0 spec towards the global summit towards the end of the year. And the idea behind this is a multi-vendor ecosystem. We're going to specify the oak card, OEMs, ODMs, MDCs.
Hyperscalers can innovate at the platform, rack scale, design all they want. And the great thing that we hear from the broad base of customers that we've talked about is: you know, the intent of Oak is we're going to continue air cooling all the way up through liquid cooling. So we will be able to do both because not every environment is going to have not gonna have liquid. So, again,
Please attend the session tomorrow if you want to learn more and provide feedback. So, at the end of the day, right, open wins. Open collaboration is what's going to win at the end of the day. That leads us to sustainable AI. You know, we do need to work on some shared standards and platforms and benchmarking for AI to make that a little.
Bit easier for everybody. How do we compare and contrast? And OCP is a great coordination layer, right? We have MOUs with OCP between UEC, UALINC, MLPerf, different things. It's a great coordination point that we can go, you know, bring everybody together, whether they're in OCP or they're outside, but bringing
All together in one place under the hood. And so AMD, as you know, is very committed to open, and that's going to be our continued theme. And so my kind of call to action here is: you know, commit to open. Open modular infrastructure. Amber talked about the need for flexibility. Engage actively in the open ecosystems.
It's an OCP or UEC or UA-Link, you know, participate because it's all of these things are going to have to come together for us to scale. And we really have to start thinking about investing now, you know, planning for the rack scale or advanced cooling technologies or advanced fabrics. If we don't want the last, if we don't want said,
25 more years before we hit billions, we need to accelerate the adoption for all. Because at the end of the day, you know, inference is a global scale, it is not a single company problem. It requires us to have this open, collaborative ecosystem. So, thank you very much, and have a good rest of your track at Oak CP.
