LF Live Webinar_ Handling Hardware Failures During Training

Thank you. Good morning, and welcome to this webinar on fault tolerance. I'm Suresh Vasudevan, CEO of Clockwork Systems. You know, last a couple of weeks ago, our team was talking to the AI infrastructure team at a large
Software company. This is one of the top 10 software companies in the world. And the head of the team said something that was staggering. What they said was that on average, at any given point in time, they have roughly 20% of their GPU nodes not operational.
Because of failures or because they were doing node tests to provision those nodes. I just want to underscore that. One out of five nodes at any given point of time is idle. Here's another fact. As neoclouds are starting to roll out modern GB200 and GB300 systems,
It has become best practice now to set aside two out of the 18 trays, so eight GPUs out of 72 GPUs as spares in just in case failures happen and they need to provision GPUs to take the place of failed GPUs. That is roughly.
11% of capacity set aside as spares just to tolerate failures. This is at a time when we have a massive GPU scarcity problem. 11 to 20% of your GPUs are essentially sitting idle to tolerate failures. These are not poor decisions.
Made by incompetent teams, they're just reality. Any of you that have deployed large-scale GPU clusters for AI training know this: a single XID error or a firmware problem or a memory issue can take down a GPU. And while a GPU going down is
Painful, that is not the real problem. The real problem is that that single GPU may be part of a distributed training job that involves hundreds or thousands of GPUs. And so, what is a two-hour GPU failure problem is not just two GPU hours wasted in a thousand.
GPU distributed training job, a single failure of that kind is a 2000 GPU hour problem. And the issue is that these failures, these disruptive events, happen all too often. Let's go to the next slide. Perhaps the best disclosure of what
What happens in these large-scale training jobs is by the paper that Meta published on their Lama training. And the numbers there are staggering and very concrete. Meta did their training on a 16,000 GPU cluster, and over a period of about 54 days, what they reported was that roughly
419 interruptions were unplanned interruptions during that 54-day time period. That's approximately a disruptive event every three hours. And when you look at the anatomy of these failures, there's a whole host of different types of failures. The most common were GPU failures, so GPUs themselves failing.
Either because of faulty silicon, because of HBM memory errors, some bit flips on your SRAM, GPUs falling off the bus, and so on and so forth. The next set of failures were network errors: switches, transceivers, cables, temperature-causing optical connections to not work really well.
Links flapping, a whole host of issues stemming from the network. And then the third chunk of problems were software failures. Roughly 11% or so were software failures. And speaking about network reliability, we have on the call here Jordan Nanos from Semi-Analysis, who's the author of ClusterMax. And I think about a year.
Year or thereabouts ago, Semi Analysis published a report that said that in a 100,000 GPU cluster, assuming a five-year mean time to failure for each individual component on the network, for transceivers in particular, the very first failure only takes 26 minutes.
26 minutes. So, when you step back and think about the strategy that we, as a community, have had around training, where the practice is when a failure happens, we basically go back to a checkpoint that might have been taken an hour ago, 90 minutes ago. This is an enormous amount of computation.
Leakage at a time when compute scarcity is a massive problem. So, how do we deal with these fault tolerance problems? That is really the subject of the rest of this webinar. And I'm going to hand off at this point to Gavin, my colleague Gavin, to talk in a lot more detail about fault tolerance in training with large-scale GPU clusters.
Gavin? Thanks very much, Suresh. And look, the good news here is there are some strategies and approaches that you can take to implement fault-tolerant training. So I'm going to start by talking about three really distinctly different approaches. And I'll just run through each one at a high level, and then we'll go through them in a little bit more detail.
Detail against a framework that tries to compare them. So the first notion is really the most common and it's become the industry standard. And it's really about while training proceeds, taking periodic checkpoints, backup copies of the state, and then when there's a failure, restoring from the most recent checkpoints.
Point, much like traditional backup and recovery has always been. It works fantastically, it's very easy to implement, it's the standard, but you pay for it every time there's a failure because you have to detect the failure, you have to restart the training from scratch, restore the check.
Point which involves lost time between the failure and the time the checkpoint was taken, and then you proceed with the training. So it looks something like this: we have the training running, take periodic checkpoints throughout, and then let's assume a failure occurs. Okay, so the failure by
Nature, because it's a tightly synchronized distributor training job, causes the entire job to crash. You then have to kick off the recovery process, which involves a detection and a restart sequence that can take some time, followed by the restore of the checkpoint itself.
And then training proceeds. So, what you see here is you have this lost amount of work between the checkpoint, the green flag over here, and the failure, and then you have the wasted time between the failure and when everything starts again. And when it starts, you just recompute the work that was.
Lost. So essentially, all the time in orange is lost time in the training. And that's very much what you saw in the Lama paper that Suresh discussed earlier. So that's the first approach. This is the industry standard. The next one I'll talk about is the clockwork torch pass approach, and it uses
This is a technique called live GPU migration. And the way it works is conceptually fairly straightforward. Training proceeds just like before, and then we hit a failure at the same point. But this time, instead of rolling back to the previous checkpoint,
A live GPU migration occurs that essentially copies the state to a healthy spare, and then training proceeds. So what you see from an outside in perspective is just a short pause while the migration takes place, and then training proceeds from the same step. You'll notice as well the way that I've drawn this picture.
With this kind of an approach, you're not reliant on checkpoints as the primary recovery mechanism, so you can take them less frequently, which has a benefit because there's a cost of taking checkpoints. The third approach came out of a group of meta-engineers called TorchFT, and it's a very clever approach.
Because really, what it's doing is it's trying to make training proceed forward irrespective of the failure conditions. So, the way it works is when there's a failure, you set up DDP parallelism. So, upon failure, it simply drops the replica group that's impacted, and training proceeds without that.
Replica group, so all the samples that would have been assigned to that replica group are effectively discarded and never processed. But it keeps training going. There's also a steady state overhead, which I'll come back to, but it looks actually initially much like the torch pass approach. So you take checkpoints less frequently because you're not reliant upon them.
Then you hit the failure condition. There's a fairly quick process where you drop the impacted replica group, and training proceeds. And what I've done in this picture is I've shown a point a little bit later where the replica group is replaced, or let's say there was a faulty node and someone.
Provisioned a new node to join the replica group, and that joined the quorum again. After which, training goes on as normal. So, the time when you're in this degraded state, for as long as it takes to bring in a working resource and bring up the replica group, you're essentially running in this mode where you
You are not processing the samples that would have been assigned to that replica group. But training continues, so that's really the goal of this approach. Now, when comparing them, it's kind of useful to look at it across a number of dimensions. And so, I'll run through each one. I'm going to spend most of the time on the first two, so don't worry about getting
Into too much gory detail in the last ones. They're fairly straightforward. But really, first about how they handle different failure scenarios. The second ones about the process of checkpointing, because in a sense, all the mechanisms use some form of capturing and copying states, they just do it for different reasons.
And at different times. And then the model code changes. So the implementation complexity, the impact on performance, which is arguably the most important dimension because of the sheer cost of running these large training jobs. And finally, the impact it has on the training semantics. So I'll start with failure types.
And I've broken it into three buckets. So, the first one is actually not a failure at all. It's a prediction of failure, but there's a class of problems that, with the right instrumentation and telemetry analysis, you can fairly well predict that they're going to happen. So, for example,
If you're monitoring GPU temperature and you see it rising at a rate, statistically, you can start to predict when it's going to fail. And instead of waiting for a sudden failure that takes everything out, you can plan for the failure. So if you're doing checkpoint restart, you might want to find a way to force a restart.
Start as force of checkpoints that you don't lose as much compute when you bring it up again. So, there are various techniques that the different approaches take to make use of this nice property that you don't have a failure, you're preempting a failure. The second class, they are genuine failures. So, they
Stop the training job from running. But the difference here between, you know, you'll see in a moment, the third category, the permanent failures, is these are recoverable, meaning the resource itself is sick for a period of time, but becomes healthy again. So, first of all, when there are software conditions,
Software bugs. Obviously, the hardware is completely fine, but you may have to restart the training to work around the bug. There are a certain class of hardware problems that reboots or resets can fix. And sometimes you just have transient conditions, network link flaps, that correct themselves.
So, the idea of the green bucket is the same resource can be used when you restart training. And then the third bucket, of course, are these hard failures where there's just a SIG component that takes out the training. Now, from that meta report that you saw earlier, from the 419 failures across
54 days, the ones in red account for about 75% of the failures. So, if you're picking a strategy, you should really optimize around how they handle the ones in red. But obviously, they're all valid conditions of failure or predicted failure. So, this is the first sort of dimension that we want to talk about.
Through. The next idea is really a bit of a deep dive on the whole checkpointing strategies that each one uses. And we'll look at it in three ways. The first thing is: what's the timing of the checkpoints and what's the purpose of the checkpoints? And broadly, there are two approaches: you take periodic point-in-time recovery.
Recovery points because they are the primary mechanism that you recover to in the event of a failure. The second idea is you capture state only when needed without really relying on checkpoints as a permanent mechanism for recovery or a regular mechanism for recovery.
The next idea or the next way to think about checkpointing is what does the recovery process look like? And there are significant differences across the three approaches I talked to. Is it a full restart followed by recompute of lost work? Or is there a way to minimize the restart penalty and keep training running in a forward process?
Progress without having to do that recompute. And the third one, simple: what resources are needed for recovery? Do you need spare resources? Can you recover against the same node if it's healthy? Can you preempt other lower-priority running jobs to get resources?
Or can you simply run without the spare as you saw with Torch FT, where it drops the replica group? Okay, so roughly, these are the sort of three interesting ways of thinking about checkpointing. Now, when it comes to checkpointing, the good news is it's really just standard, it's part of the distributed checkpoint library, which is part of PyTorch.
And the way it works is you set it up to take checkpoints every n number of steps using the checkpoint save function. Choosing n is very important because it's a trade-off between the cost of the checkpoint, how much impact it has. So if you're taking checkpoints that block the
The GPU while they're being taken, you lose that time because the whole training job against all the GPUs in the training job essentially are stalled while the checkpoint takes place. So the cost of checkpoint, then the cost of the storage to, you know, the persistent storage to place the checkpoint on, or the memory if you're doing in-memory checkpoints.
has a very high cost and the bandwidth to move the data, particularly if it's shared network storage, for example. And then how much compute can you or recompute can you tolerate upon failure? So that delta between the last checkpoint and the time of failure, how much can you tolerate?
And all of this is really a function of the expected trend failure frequency. The more frequent the failure, the more aggressive you have to become without some of these. But obviously, there are big trade offs in cost and performance. The types of checkpoints you can use, there are really broadly two types.
You can perform synchronous checkpoints, which is really the most common and standard and foolproof. And the way synchronous checkpoints work is you block the GPUs, or the GPUs essentially don't perform any operations. So you're in a frozen state, and then you copy the checkpoint state.
Or the model state onto something that's persistent and then allow training to proceed. The size of these checkpoints in large models can be measured in terabytes, so it can take a considerable time to perform the checkpoint save if you're doing synchronous checkpoints, especially if they're going.
To some form of networked persistent storage. So, those are synchronous checkpoints. By far, like I said, the most common and easiest to implement and foolproof mechanism. The second methodology that's becoming sort of more prominent of taking asynchronous checkpoints.
Checkpoints. And what you're doing here is you're blocking the GPU for as little time as possible by staging them through memory and then asynchronously persisting them to something else. The way it typically works is you take a rapid in-memory checkpoint, then you push it maybe to a
Locally attached NVMe, SSD, Drive, but that's not really good enough because if the whole node fails, it means you lose access to the checkpoint data. So now, asynchronously, you may want to copy it to something that's persistent, that's shared across other nodes, so that other nodes have.
Access to. And there are various different permutations of that, but the idea is you block GPUs for as little as possible, but it comes at a memory cost and a complexity cost. Okay, now diving a little bit more in. I mentioned earlier about the restart penalty with checkpoint restarts. If you break it down,
There are lots of ways to break it down, but there are a whole lot of things that have to happen in order to restart the training. And the first one is actually the big wild card. It can take a considerable amount of time just to detect the failure. So, for example, a nickel watchdog timeout in PyTorch defaults to 10 minutes. So, you can have a
Failure that isn't even recognized while everything is essentially suspended for 10 minutes before the whole job crashes. And then the even bigger wild card is coming up with the resource and provisioning the resource to restart the training on. Because when you bring in, for example,
a new node, it has to have all the same versions of software and firmware, etc., etc. So even in very well-tuned environments, with all the right well-oiled machinery, this can take many minutes, tens of minutes to even hours to bring in new resources. And this is very real.
So that's just the first step. Then you restart the job. That's fairly rapid. The orchestrator has to terminate all the processes and restart the jobs across the cluster. You initialize the processes and networks. Sometimes you rerun the auto-tuning scripts to tune everything so that can take
A small number of minutes, then you retrieve the checkpoint. The time it takes to retrieve the checkpoint relates to what kind of checkpoint you have available. So if it's an in-memory checkpoint, it might restore in tens of seconds. If it's on persistent network storage and it's a large model, it could take many, many.
Minutes, 10, 20 minutes to restore the checkpoint. Data loader initialization, and finally, there's a first step overhead. So you have to warm up CUDA, you know, allocate memory, and so on. So, and then training proceeds. After all that, you have the recompense.
Penalty. So the time between the checkpoint was taken and the failure, all that work needs to be recomputed. So you can see it's a pretty heavy cost that you pay. Now, the good news is there are some optimizations around that to try and speed things up. The first one I'll talk about is Torch Elastic. So it's been part of PyTorch Core.
Since 1.9, there's some capabilities to manage the checkpoint, the job restarts, and the relaunching of the processes to optimize that. But I would say the most interesting aspect is it also allows for a changed world side upon resumption.
So this is useful if you don't have a spare node. You can actually restart the training job with fewer nodes and without dropping data samples. So that's a really nice capability. There's implementation complexity, of course, in doing all of this.
The second optimization or set of optimizations that I'll talk about is something that NVIDIA talked about at GTC last month. It's still an experimental project. I've put the GitHub link in the bottom left of the screen. But it has some really nice capabilities.
There's some hang detection to speed up the time it takes to detect. That comes with a fairly heavy implementation cost. I'll talk about that in a moment. But really, the big innovations come in how you perform the restart. For example, if there's a software issue and the process is still running, then it
Has an optimized what's called an in-process restart. So you essentially just restart the process, and if the checkpoint is still in memory, if it's an in-memory checkpoint, the whole under certain conditions, it's only a very limited set, you can actually restart the training in under a minute, which is.
Is pretty spectacular. In-job restart assumes the process is dead, but the node is still up and the containers are still active. So you can do a more optimized checkpoint, slower than in-process, but still better than a full restart.
But again, it only works under certain conditions. A lot of those hard crashes, you saw the 75% of hard crashes, will in this model fall back still to a full restart. But where possible, it tries to optimize that. And like Torch Elastic, it also supports the idea of a smaller.
World size upon resumption, which is a useful capability. But I'll just point out these are optimizations on the restart. It doesn't get away from the notion that you are still recovering from a checkpoint that was taken prior to the failure, and you still have to recompute the work that was lost.
Between the failure and the time the checkpoint was taken. So, those are some of the optimizations. So, putting it all together, if you compare them across those three dimensions, and I've broken checkpointing into the optimized version and the standard version, both the timing is periodic point in time.
You're taking them for the purpose of recovering later. The recovery penalty is similar across both versions, other than you optimize the restart. So you still have to recompute, but in some situations, you can optimize the restart with things like NVRX. And then the resources needed for recovery.
In the case of the regular stock standard checkpoint restart start, you do need a spare resource or preempt a running resource or use the same resource if it's still healthy. In the case of NVRX, you can actually reduce the world size. So that's checkpoint restart. When you look at the clockwork torch path,
Implementation, while you can still take checkpoints as a fail-safe, really the primary mechanism is what's called an instantaneous state capture. And that's done at the time it's needed. So essentially, you're capturing the state from the failed resource, moving it across to a healthy spare, and then resuming tracking.
Training. So the recovery penalty is pretty small. It's just a short pause, and they're really like these as-needed checkpoints. The current implementation of TorchPulse does require a spare resource or a spare resource that could be preempted from a lower priority job, or of course, the same one if it.
becomes healthy again. And then Torch FT, it doesn't actually use checkpoints at all upon failure. It uses a state capture or it reconstructs the state from a healthy replica group when the failed replica group rejoins the quorum.
So, it does that state capture when it grows back to its full world size. The recovery penalty, much like Torch Pulse, is very short. It's just about the time it takes to recognize the failure and drop the replica group. And because it's dropping the replica group, it doesn't need spare resources.
which is a really nice capability. So that's the sort of detail on checkpointing. Just quickly, I'll run through the last three dimensions. It's fairly straightforward, so I won't use a lot of slides here. But the first one is the complexity of implementation.
So, I'll start with just standard checkpoint restarts. There's really no code changes to make. It's part of PyTorch DCP distributed checkpoints. And it's really built into everyone's models already. So it's bugging.
Far the most, like I said, it's standard. There is no implementation complexity because it's so well understood. TorchPass, I've broken into two different purple squares because there are two ways you can deploy it. There's what's called a model transparent way, which uses Linux Creuse.
Checkpoints and CUDA snapshots in order to capture the state. So it's done really from an infrastructure perspective, and that doesn't require any model changes whatsoever. There's a second mode you can run in, which we call model-aware, and this has just a
A very small, lightweight set of changes. You essentially import the TorchPass library into your training code, you register the existing load and save checkpoint functions with TorchPass, and they're used to capture the state when needed. The reason that we have the two different modes here is because.
It's more optimized. The model aware is just slightly faster than the model transparent, but it needs to have small code changes versus no code changes at all. Torch FT requires some code changes. I put it in the medium bucket for two reasons. It's more in.
Depth than what you need for something like Torch Pulse, but also we saw when using it, there are a lot of undocumented things that you have to do, or not well documented, that involve kind of quite a bit of effort to get it working, especially the first time you.
And then finally, if you're using NVRX, NVRX is actually a whole suite of capabilities, but in particular, the hang detection, which can really reduce the time it takes to detect the failure, involves using what's called the sections API, which means you have to essentially wrap each.
Each piece of your code that you want to be able to detect hangs in around you know to call the sections API, and you have to choose appropriate timeouts for each code section. So that's a fairly heavy lift when you implement it. Anyway, that's on.
The model code changes required. Performance impact, which arguably is the most important dimension of everything. So, if we start with checkpoint restart, the checkpoint overhead depends on the types of checkpoints you're taking and can range from tens of seconds per checkpoint if you're doing in-memory.
Checkpoints at the cost of memory, or a small number of minutes, five or so minutes, depending on the size of the model, if you're copying it to persistent storage asynchronous checkpoints. So there's a, you know, still a big, you know, there is an impact there. The big penalty, and I've talked about this.
At length, so I won't harp on it here. Is the restart penalty, the restart recompute penalty? And I note here that with things like NVRX, you can optimize some of the restart, but not everything. TorchPass, there's no steady-state overheads, and then upon failure, you get this.
Pause that and we measured this. I'll show you the testing in a moment with a 109 billion parameter model. Took about a hundred, takes about 100 seconds to do the migration, the GPU migration. And finally, Torch FT, and this is sort of worth a bit of a discussion.
There's a very substantial steady-state penalty because the way it's been implemented, it requires the use of the Glue Communication Collective library for cross-replica or reduce operations. Nickel, the NVIDIA Collective Communication,
Library is used within replica groups. Nickel's optimized around RDMA transfers to the GPU between the network and the GPU, so it's highly optimized and performant. Glue uses TCP sockets, so it means that when you're doing the cross-replica all reduces.
Everything has to move through the CPU and the network to get to the other replica groups, which costs a lot even when there are no failures. The penalty on failure is very small, not unlike the Torch Pass and it.
It sort of varies just depending on how the restart is, how the failure is captured. But it's pretty quick, typically certainly less than two minutes. So that's really the sort of framework that compares them all. The final piece of the training semantics.
You saw with checkpoint restart and torch pass, they're unaltered. So training proceeds with or without failures, with essentially the same results as it would have in either case. Torch FT, the semantics change because while you're in this degraded state,
For as long as there's a failure or a missing replica group, you're essentially not processing samples. So that does alter the training outcome. And it may or may not matter depending on how many failures you have and how long they occur, but it certainly is a, it alters the training semantics.
Putting all that together, I won't read this eye chart, but I've tried to color code where each of the strategies does better or worse. And again, it's really just a summary across all the dimensions. Just before I hand over to Jordan, I'm just going to quickly run through.
Through some testing results of those three approaches. And the testing that we ran, and Jordan actually ran fairly similar tests independently. So, Jordan, feel free to jump in and make any comments. But the way that we did this, we used a 64 NVIDIA H200 GPU configuration, 89.
Each with eight GPUs in Google Cloud. And we use Torch Titan to train a Lama for mixture of experts, 109 billion parameter model. We set up fairly, probably overkill parallelism in this case, just to show that all these strategies do work with fairly complex parallelism.
Setups, and we ran the training for 3,000 steps. To keep it as an apples-for-apples comparison, in all cases, even though the checkpoints weren't relied upon for the two out of the three strategies, we took asynchronous checkpoints every hundred steps. And then we ran four tests: a baseline with apples.
Failure and checkpoint restart, torch pass and torch FT, where we injected failures on average every hour between forty-five and seventy-five minutes. We used the same random number generator seed across the three tests so that the failures occurred at the same point because it makes for a much clearer comparison.
And this is what it looked like. So, as you would expect, the baseline ran at a steady state throughout the 3,000 steps, completed in just over 400 minutes. And that's really what we want to compare the other methodologies to. Checkpoint restart, completed in about twice the time with the hourly.
Failures. And what you can see here is the X's on the line are the points where the failures were injected, and the red triangles are where the restart commenced. So the time that it took to restart the training job. So the delta,
The x-axis delta represents paused time restarting, and the y-axis delta represents the amount of recompute needed before it catches back up to where it was. So that's why you have this jagged curve. And of course, the amount of recompute is just purely in this.
Case it's random because it depends on at what point between the two checkpoints the failure occurred. But that's what it looks like. Torch pass completed in about the same time as the baseline. You can see the blue rectangles show how long each migration took. So, about on average, I think it was 100 seconds per.
Migration for the 109 billion parameter model. And finally, Torch FT, which the replica group dropping and failure checking was actually very rapid. Where you get hit with Torch FT is this cross-replica or reduce.
Using glue. So the steady state is slower, and that's why it completed in about twice the time of the baseline. So, with that, I'm going to ask Jordan to jump in. And Jordan's been looking at this and doing a lot of studies with semi-analysis on the cost implications of how you implement a fault.
Training, a fault-tolerant training strategy. So, John. Yeah, absolutely. Thanks, Kevin. So, like you said, first of all, you're absolutely right. We did see exactly what you saw in our testing. We tested different models, in our case, GPTOSS.
You know, the testing was in some sense about understanding the code changes that were required and then forecasting forward what we can run on a small cluster, you know, 32, 64 GPUs, to what we expect people would experience at larger scale. So I'm going to take that.
This chance, yeah, right, to walk through some of the modeling that we've done on the financial side to try to help people better understand the financial impacts of these systems. And I'll start with a couple of slides. So, as you were alluding to,
Of course, at Semi-Analysis, we work on ClusterMax. ClusterMax, we believe, is the industry standard rating system for neoclouds. On screen, you can see three of the articles that have contributed to this research effort back in October 2024.
AI NeoCloud Playbook and Anatomy. We coined the term NeoCloud, something that's kind of made its way through the industry at this point. In March, we actually ranked NeoClouds, covered 26 of them with hands-on testing. And then back in November of 2025, we made an update expanding that coverage to 84 different NeoClouds.
Hands-on testing are for what it's worth when people are looking at these slides. You're welcome to click in on the presentation and go to the website, as I just did there by accident. But the most recent update to ClusterMax that was published on Monday is.
Topical, especially for this conversation, because the big focus is not necessarily on testing more providers. We added four providers to the list of hands-on testing and then seven more for tracking, bringing the total up to 95, I believe, that are ranked.
And so, anyway, in this update, the major contribution of the article was really this calculator and this theory around trying to measure exactly how much of an expense downtime can cause on a cluster. This can be due to interruptions.
Failures, upgrades, any interruption really that the provider causes onto the cluster to cause the nodes to not be usable for useful training work, we would call that as a good put expense. And so we walked through this in great detail in the article. And what I'm going to
To do now is just walk through the calculator in a couple of example scenarios because, new on our website at clustermax.ai/slash TCO, we have this calculator live so that people can actually use it for their own, you know, scenarios to view exactly how much a, you know,
A potential discrepancy would be on pricing when you consider the impact of downtime or good put. In other words, up until this time, when exploring these scenarios, what we've seen or what we've heard from users is that they don't really know exactly how much.
Downtime costs them. What they know is that there's an intuition around it feeling frustrating. It feels like work is slower. But you don't always get a shot to test two different clusters worth $10 million per year or more.
As some of these labs are renting. And so you kind of have to do this on theory before going into that effort. So I'll walk through the calculator now. Basically, there's two tabs. The first is the Cluster TCO calculator, which allows you to cover things like the cost of the GPUs, the cost of storage, networking.
CPUs support good put, which we're going to dig into, setup and debugging expense, and result in a total price and comparison that you can adjust to to cover like the term length or including this, these not actual.
Like expenses. The good put setup and debugging are implied expenses. They're not actually going to be something you have to pay to a provider, but it's meant to add on to the total cost to show an implied price if you're doing less useful work on a given month and you therefore need to rent the cluster for longer. And so I want to dig in on.
On good put here, because obviously that was kind of this topic of why people would consider fault-tolerant training in the first place. And so, in our example scenario that I've got on screen, we're assuming equal pricing across three separate providers with 5,184 GB300 NVL72.
A round number for the latest networking there based on the switch radio. So the result is that it's about $15 million per month, or $16 in this case for the gold tier, and above that, over 17 and a half, and approaching 18 for the hyperscaler and silver tier. And the
Core reason for that, if we scroll down to the price discrepancy and we try to attribute that to this cost, you know, if we compare silver tier and gold tier, for example, this big red bar in the middle shows that 90% of the pricing discrepancy is due to a good put expense difference. That's that 18%.
Good put that's costing 2.7 million per month compared to the 917,000 on the gold tier. And so, where does that come from? Well, on the good put expense calculator, we implement this great unifying theory of good put, which we publish in the article under the section.
Header, the grand unifying theory of goodput. And it basically allows us to input the different scenarios depending on what sort of fault tolerant training framework you're using, how many failures you expect to see on the cluster in a given month, and how quickly the provider is able to recover from the failure and respond.
And so this calculator inputs those formulas, and it basically takes in inputs such as the cluster size, the job size, the blast radius, as Suresh said at the beginning. 64 of the 72 GPUs in the rack would be down if there was an outage on a single GPU, and that covers.
The replica group or the EP domain, or however you're configuring this 4000 GPU job on this cluster. We have some expected GPU-MTBF, which you can read some of our articles to understand. In other words, higher is better for this, where it takes longer for an interruption to happen on an individual GPU.
In the cluster. Frequency with which you're taking checkpoints, that matters in this third column because checkpoint restart is assumed to be used. It doesn't matter for the calculation of the downtime for the fault tolerant example. The time it takes to fail over, that matters for fault tolerant. The number of idle spare GPUs, which in this case only applies for the torch.
Pass example that we're using. And then I've got Torch FT on screen here, which doesn't have IL spares, but does have this network overhead that we're considering down lower, 5% network overhead on the performance of the cluster, which again is highly variable and depends on your size.
So, if you kind of multiply and add all those inputs together, you're gonna get a result of how much expense you have due to downtime, how much expense you have due to performance overheads, and that's gonna add up to your total good put expense. Just to show you a little bit about the sensitivity here.
I'll then input the Lama 3 paper, which was discussed on this call, what those scenarios were. So, in that case, it's a roughly a 20,000 GPU cluster size, and the LLAMA 3 behemoth 3.1405B behemoth run was a 16,000 GPU run, where obviously there's more.
More GPUs failing over time. And so, what you can see is that that total good put loss when I change those inputs changes to 21, 26, and 71% on these inputs. So, the sensitivity of running fault-tolerant training at that massive scale.
Is so big. Like it really puts into numbers, this calculator puts into numbers, the intuition that people have built on actually running these jobs at scale and trying to make progress towards a research objective at that large scale.
And so I'll come back and actually punch in those numbers again for the 20,000 and 16,000, get that 21, 26, and 71, and then flip back over to the cluster TCO calculator. If I'm now back in this scenario and I've got that expense, I mean, it's a massive difference between the.
The different providers where you see this checkpoint restart example. It's just not feasible. It's now a net 40% difference between the three providers and means that the intuition that people have with respect to how many GPs are.
Are actually being used, sorry, GPUs of an equal price when they're actually being compared together can have a really significant difference when it comes to. Sorry, let me try and say that again. There can be a really significant difference.
In terms of total cost of ownership, when you consider GPUs of equal sticker price, and then you try and apply that calculation to your total cluster cost. So that's what I've got to share. We are definitely going to be sharing the slides. I saw that question in the chat.
Happy to take some questions with the limited time we have left here. Also, happy to follow up. And hopefully, this clustermax.ai/slash TCO webpage, as well as the article, is a useful reference for everybody out there who's trying to do these calculations for themselves.
Thank you, Jordan. And I'm just looking, it looks like there were a few questions in the chat. I think, Suresh, you answered a couple. Did you want to elaborate on any of the questions? I think there's a more recent one. Jordan, I'm wondering if you have.
Any answers on what are the estimates for MTBF for newer GPUs like B300 and GB300? I don't know that there's a lot of data, but maybe you have a point of view, Jordan. Yeah, definitely. So meantime between failure is all about understanding how often.
GPUs are going to fail, individual GPUs, or individual components in the cluster. I mean, there's different MTBFs for drives and cables and switches and everything, right? The providers all have this data in terms of how often things fail. And I saw the question in the chat. It's definitely
Right, in terms of the bathtub curve, like where on initial burn-in, you're going to see a ton of failures in a given cluster. It's going to reach steady state, and then over time, as you use the cluster, there's going to be more failures as components wear out. So, when it comes to newer
GPUs, what we've seen or what we've heard from customers is not necessarily that there is a significant difference between the Hopper GPUs like an H100, H200, when compared to the Blackwell GPUs like a B200 or B300. What is significantly different in the GB200 and GB300 is the NV.
L72, which is that blast radius I referred to before. So, even if you have the exact same failure rate across different generations of GPUs, if you have a failure in a 64 GPU domain, you need to fail over to another tray with four GPUs in it, or an entire another rack. If you have a
Switch failure or an issue with the cable cartridge in the back of the like the back plane for the those racks. And so I think the more interesting, or if we look at the different modeling we've done for different good put scenarios, the sensitivity.
Due to a 64 GPU domain, is much larger in terms of its impact on goodput when you compare even just B300 to GP300, as an example, as opposed to two different providers where one has more failures than the other. In addition, that's maybe also another point, which
Just to say there can be massive differences between different providers that you can attribute to things like how cleanly they're running the data center, how hot their GPUs are running in that data center, air quality, I meant in terms of cleanliness, how often they need to take down clusters to do upgrades due to firmware or due to driver version.
Versions, how often they need to take storage down or the networking down, or there's failures on the network, or there's flapping links on the cables. I mean, you went through the whole taxonomy of failures. There's all sorts of different things that can go wrong. And so, again, we've seen variations of like 50% or more, two types.
Really, 100% difference in terms of like how often one failures cluster, one provider's cluster will fail for a given customer as opposed to another cluster somewhere else. So like a GPUM TBF of like 30,000 instead of 15,000 would be two times more failures, right?
And that is that variation impacts people's real experience much more than, hey, the black will fails a little bit or a little less than Hopper. We haven't seen that second framing really be a big impact to people. People would not choose to use.
The previous generation GPUs just because they're theoretically more stable, because they've been routing for two, three years instead of wearing out at five or brand new in the first year. That's not really a consideration. I think the one comment I would make: sort of, this is in working with one neocloud provider. What is interesting.
Is that in the GB300 systems or GB200 systems in particular? The fact that the spares that can be used by TorchPass as replacements when a GPU fails are topology-wise exactly the same, connected via NV-Link. And so you don't have to think about is.
My replacement correctly placed from a topology perspective, and that makes the entire torch pass process. The state transfer happens over NVLink. The topology of the replacement node or tray in this case happens to be exactly the same as the one that's gone away. And so, in that sense,
Sense, this cloud provider thought about TorchPass as particularly effective with GB200, GB300s. There was another interesting question, which has sort of got nuances, Jordan, on what happens to failure rates with sort of copper being replaced by optical in the scale-up network.
These high racks scale densities and this puts and takes. And so I'm curious how you would think about that. Yeah, it's super interesting. So I think this has to do again with failure rate versus blast radius. We already saw this for the move to NDR 400 to NDR 800.
Or, in other words, when NVIDIA introduced the concept of planar networks, multi-plane networks, when it comes to Rocky, like Spectrum X, in other words, you used to have just like one cable coming out of one NIC, right? And that would be your like HDR.
100 NIC that would uplink and maybe be a breakout cable on the switch side or like HDR 200 right away. But now with 800 gig links, you can't, the physical medium is not a single cable. What you actually have is four cables transferring 200 gigs of data. And so you don't want.
Four 200-gig cables all running to the same port on the same switch because that's a big failure issue. If any link starts flapping or any like physical link goes down, now you have to, you've kind of taken out an entire link. And so, four-plane or two-plane options allow you to split links across like the physical.
Cable across multiple switches, which is already a consideration that people have to choose between when they think about structured versus unstructured cabling, or they think about the shuffle boxes or shuffle cables that you would need to use in order to actually make this split happen. Structured.
For example, is just like if I have a link flap, will it be restricted to just that one link, or will it be impacting other areas of the network where I have to replace like an entire hundred-meter cable run or something like that just for one swap? And so I think in general,
The feeling when it comes to copper versus optics. There's plenty of optics already being used in the scale-out network that I'm describing here. But we're going to take that same, all those same learnings where you have less total failures or less total flabby.
But a bigger impact, a bigger blast radius on a given flap or given link failure, and apply that to the scale-up network effectively, where CPO comes onto the stuff in the Verarubin generation, at the end of the Verarubin generation, not initially. And then you start to see more of that.
Like blast radius, where a single issue is going to take out an entire rack. And now the rack is like Verarubin Ultra 576 or 144 or something, where it's like, you know, four times bigger, you know, domain, like compute domain or replica group or blast radius when compared to the current generation.
NVL72, which already seems like a big failure domain when compared to like the eight-way systems of the past. So, maybe the last comment is just like: this is really becoming an engineering challenge for only the absolute biggest companies in the world who are the biggest customers of these products.
And I think we're going to see a revisiting of some of the learnings and technologies that exist for the Frontier Labs and how that applies to standard eight-way systems or now 72-way systems that smaller companies can actually use, which, in some ways, is exactly what TorchPass represents.
From my perspective, taking some software that's really been proprietary and restricted to the frontier labs and having a way to bring it that same experience to a lot more companies in the industry. Yeah, no, this makes sense. I guess I was, in my mind, it feels like copper will have higher bit error rates, and that's why you're moving.
Towards optics, but optics will have higher failure rates because of thermal and optical degradation. And so, at the system level, it's not clear to me if the system MTTF actually improves or degrades. The promise of CPO is that it can fix some of the failure modes of traditional.
optical and maybe without the problems of copper's high bitterer rate. And so in theory, it should get better than traditional optical and therefore be the best of all worlds. But that's still TBD. I just think the MTTF at the system level is a little harder to then surmise from all of this.
It's a good point. I think the possibly like the trade-off or the consideration on these designs, it kind of similar to NVL72, which is to say the alternative option of using copper just won't exist. And so it's a mood point. Yeah.
Like in theory, we could use copper and have this trade-off, but I think you will have exactly one option you could purchase, and that will be ours. Indeed, it's a moot point. It is what it is. Exactly. Yeah. Indeed. Yeah. I think we're out of questions, guys, and we're right up on time, but definitely appreciate everybody.
Who attended live? And I know that I'm excited to see the recording posted online and some of the slides posted online so that we can keep sharing, keep learning. There's plenty more to learn about fault-tolerant training as we go forward into the next generation of Verirubin hardware that's coming into this.
Year and other hardware too. Indeed. Well, thank you all for joining as well. It's been a pleasure. Thank you very much, everyone. And back to you, Candace at the Linux Foundation. Thank you so much to our speakers for your time today. And thank you, everyone, for joining us. As a reminder, this recording will be.
on the Linux Foundation's YouTube page later today. We hope you join us for future webinars. Have a wonderful day.