drm_and_cgroup_memory_management_-_two_great_tastes_-_David_Airlie

Thanks. Um yeah, for people that don't know me, I'm uh Dave Early. I'm a distinguished engineer at Red Hat, um the upstream GPU DRM maintainer and this is something that happened this year that I was forced to deal with. It was not by choice, it's very rare I have to do something, but this was a hat to do. Um
People ask questions. But before I get into what I had to do, I just wanted to give a bit of a sort of a history of why it hadn't happened before now. GPU, sort of memory history. Traditionally, GPUs have only been in client devices. Nobody really cared about them beyond the single unit.
User space. We had typical either unified memory GPUs where there was just system RAM. There's a lot of laptops, a lot of desktops, a lot of embedded devices are built around that. We had discrete memory GPUs, laptops and desktops with a PCI Express card, VRAM being just device memory.
So, a lot of our sort of standard use cases for GPUs and DRM was mostly just devices that had a single user. No one really cared about actually, you know, I'm sure people cared, but no one cared enough, put it that way. But some of the other little, these are just little small asides, like, yeah, one of the sort of differences that GPUs.
GPU memory allocation has from standard thing, and I'll go into a bit more, is that we do like to use on-cached memory in a lot of places for just these small extra speedups. And GPU virtual memory is a thing, but we don't have things like page faults and stuff, so there's quite often no real advantage to doing.
Page-based allocations, we have to sort of do things at a bigger level because we don't want to be swapping in and out of the page-level granularity. Even now, we don't really have useful page faults. So, it's just the architecture of how they work versus CPUs is often different. But so, what happened? Well,
HPC kinda happened, but really in yeah, was the start of it. But again, people cared, but did I want to pay for it? No, no. But AI happened and suddenly the combination of these things, people suddenly started caring. Um so yeah, well what changed in the architect you know so suddenly people wanted but GPUs and servers more.
And actually use them. A quite common configuration that we started seeing was like putting eight discrete GPUs into one machine, like using PCI Express, using NVLink, AMD's Infinity Fabric, just being a number of different architectures of things. But it seems to have sort of the industry has settled around like four and eight GPU boxes.
Is kind of a thing that seems to be useful. A lot of those were a single CPU and then discrete GPUs. But there's also been a push for more, like, I'm calling them APUs because that's what the old name for them was. But it's combined CPU and GPU on a single chip.
These often have coherent memory architectures. Mostly PCI Express is non-coherent. You can have snooping and things, but these are actually CPU, GPU, coherent memory architectures. The CPU could be an x86, it could be an ARM. I don't think I've seen a RISC-V yet, but I'm sure it'll be out there. One of the ones that
Everyone's like, sort of, where this problem actually came up to me was on the AMD MI300A architecture, which is their first one of their MI ones that is an APU, that the CPU and GPU had shared memory architecture. There was no discrete video RAM, no device memory. But other ones that are in the field that you may have seen is the DNV.
NVIDIA, Grace Hopper, Grace Blackwell Systems, they're also using this style of thing. So this happened in the last few years, and suddenly Cgroup started to matter to people. It was like, okay, yeah,'cause we want to be able to run multiple things on these. We want to be able to have multiple users. We want to be able to schedule things. We want to be able to have.
Limits on our server memory usage and things like that. So suddenly people started talking about cgroups. But also worse than suddenly cgroups mattering was suddenly NUMA started mattering, because people wanted to be allocating their pages on the right node nearest the GPU. And in these unified architectures, you had multiple MI300As in the same thing.
EO, you would have to allocate on the right one. So that's where I got involved. It was like what C group matters and Newman matters. So I'll just give a little overview then of how the DRM sort of memory manages before I get into where I join the two. The basics are using.
Unit of GPU memory is called an object. It's usually a bunch of pages. As I said, we don't use single page type tracking. We generally track things at an object level. This primarily comes from more the graphics side, but compute still uses this model in a lot of places. It just means you have a single object.
That if you need to move it around, you've moved the whole thing. You don't ever need to address pages. You can't page in and out. So the whole thing has to be present and valid for it to be useful. So there's no point messing around with just doing some of the pages. We have the sort of gem object encapsulation. That's used by nearly every driver to encapsulate their objects.
But we also have a sort of next layer internal system called TTM, and we use that where we have a case where there's device memory and system memory. And we want to still have an object, but then the object could move between device memory and system memory. And TTM is there to provide that support to let you migrate objects between the two.
There's still a gem object, but inside a gem object, you've got a TTM object, and the TTM object then controls what's inside that. TTM also provides, as I said, the on-cache paging stuff. All the support for dealing with on-cached pages and keeping track of them and pooling them is all done by TTM. TTM has a shrinker for buffer objects.
We call them buffer objects as well as the sort of internal name. This is called from the driver. It's called under memory pressure for reclaim. First of all, it will look for any objects marked as discardable. That's not a very common thing. There's not very many reasons that you would allocate a GPU object as discardable.
Guardable, but the people have started adding this, so there's like one or two small use cases that it's happening in. But otherwise, it will start pushing out the swap. It will start pulling your pages, allocating schmem, dumping it into the schmem, and then the schmem swap it out. So that's kind of how we do things at the moment.
One of the little, like, this is one of these problems. It's like, it's not a hugely common thing, but it's a really annoying thing, and you sort of have to support it properly. But it's also, you know, we could not, we could do without it, but there's enough use cases that it's just, it's worth the pain. One of the things you get on.
Um with you know, cached memory, you can over PCI Express you can snoop it, it's like so you the the GPU can see when the the cached memory changes, but that has overheads. Um and if you don't have to have those overheads, well, you probably can avoid them, and especially with uh GPUs people really, really care about like as fast as possible and
Every corner. Also, on a lot of the APUs, even where there wasn't a PCR Express bus between them, having an on-cache mapping would like give you a small incremental improvement over not having it. And of course, everyone cared about this. Why is on-cache memory complicated?
At least on x86, one of the problems with PAT, the path table page attribute tables, is that you cannot have pages with multiple mappings in the system at the same time for the same page. So you're not allowed.
There's a lot of rules about what you are not allowed to do. Yeah. So it's like you have to, AM64 is the same. So it's like, yo, we have these APIs that we invented years ago called SetMemory UC and WC, and they've pretty much their main job is just to remove stuff from the linear mapping so that you can have on-cached mappings of those pages and put them in user.
Space and map them in wherever you had. But the transition between cached and uncached and back and forth is has overheads. So we have to mitigate those overheads because if we hit them on every single time we allocated a buffer object that needed them, they start to add up. So we use a set of pools. We have to go
Call them their caches, but because we're talking about cached on cached pages, of course, I think a different name. So we have a set of pools in TTM that keep track of when we have a bunch of on-cached pages and we keep them around so that the overheads are mitigated. We used to actually pool cached pages about about two or three years ago.
Ago, I think we ripped out the cache page pool idea because it didn't really make sense because we were just taking memory away from the system that the system allocator should just be as good at allocating. So we got rid of that. The pools also are NUMA-specific. Again, that was something that was added a few years ago to handle the fact that you needed to keep.
These on-Cache page pools tied to the NUMA node. And I think NUMA was also one of the reasons we ripped out pooling the cache pages because, again, you needed to have all the NUMA administrator was much better at doing this than we could be. I said, pools only get filled on object-free, so the first time you create an object,
In the system, it's uncached, they will do all the work. When you free that, it will drop all those pages in the pool and it will continually do that as things are freed and new allocations will come out of the pool. Again, there is a shrinker as well, so there's a second shrinker in the system in the TTM layer, and that when you hit reclaim, the first thing it does is go ahead.
And gets all the uncached pages that are sitting in the pool and sets them back to cached and gives them back to the system allocator. That's like a very low overhead shrinker. If you, you know, it's like very quick to run, but again, you have to go into reclaim to do that. So, and that's a bit of a painful place to be. You don't want to enter into reclaim just to do this.
So what can what can cgroups do to start helping some of this problem? So about a year, maybe a year, two years ago, we started we've had a lot of cgroups discussions over the years about how we could use things, but someone finally gave in and wrote at least a device memory controller, which was enough for us to
At least track device memory allocations and say, okay, you have a budget, you need to stick with your device memory allocation budget. This is the DMEM controller. I won't go into too much on this today. It exists, but we haven't really used it in a lot of scenarios yet. But there will be a bit more work to go in the future.
The big problem, of course, I had was how do I track system memory allocations? The MI300A device that I was faced with has no device memory. It just doesn't have it. So it's like, well, I need to start using system memory allocations. But of course, I should just use MMCG. That's what the memory C group controller is for. And that sounds nice and simple.
Until you have to sit down and do it. So, start a little problems that I faced as we went along. So, even if we do say, like, I'll use MCG in that unified memory architecture, but what does it mean in the non-unified memory? Even when we have device memory and system memory, and I allocate an object that
Live in both. How do I account that? Do I account it to the DMEM controller? Do I account it to the MEM CG controller? Do I count it to both? It's only ever in one place at a time, but you have to be able to deal with the fact that it's going to move. And
So, say mostly you want these objects to live in device memory, and you will want them to counter the device memory. But occasionally, someone will over-commit device memory, or someone will cause you to use more device memory, and you will have to kick something out. That's where you hit the problem. Like, this is one of the sort of fundamental problems that nobody has solved, and I think it's why nobody has moved forward with it.
I think they had to solve this to move forward, but I think we can deal with it. But it's like when the eviction happens, what do you do if it doesn't know where to put it? Like, if process A has used an object, his object in device memory, and then process B comes along and kicks it out, who has to account for that?
System memory allocation that's going to be used when it gets kicked out? Is it going to be, you know, process A should have accounted for it, but what happens if there's no, it hasn't got enough overhead in its C group? Like, what happens if the mem CG that process A is using has no space left in it? Well, where the hell is this memory going to go? Do I still evict it? Do I fail the eviction?
But then process B is getting hit with problems because process A has done something bad, and then that sort of breaks your container and your C group idea, like that these things should be completely separate things. And this is one of the ongoing problems that we have to solve. But it's been a big one, there's been a lot of discussions about.
I don't think there's an answer for this other than you're going to have to just realize it's a problem and hopefully you can configure your cgroups to not let this happen. But it's a messy thing to do because, yeah, what do you do when another process is doing something and you have to account for in the original process?
Nice place to suddenly return Enomem. There's no nice place to suddenly tell the original process A that you've run out of memory because it's not even executing at the moment. And probably the next time it executes, the first thing it's going to do is push all those objects back into VRAM and then it won't have run out of memory anymore. So it's, there's a lot of like, yeah, how do we solve? This is a very like
There is no solution to this yet, but it's something I want to make sure we have on the records and people will know that that what slows this down. Another problem is I have a question. Mike?
So what's the lifetime of the uh of those objects which has to be migrated within these two? Are are they associated with some process of the that A in the previous your slide? So another is might be like killing stuff as well, like ohm killing.
If there's no. I'm wondering if the lifetime of you can associate with some process? Oh, generally, yeah, generally, objects have a lifetime associated with a process. Sometimes there will be DMA buff shared between multiple processes. And again, there's also issues with what you would sort of call priority inversion.
Where a lower priority process could share something with a higher like a higher security and that we see that more on desktops as well, where you've got like a compositor process and a somebody submitting something to the compositor process. And if that pro if this process can actually cause the compositor to run out of memory or seg you know, get the EO mem into that.
you've pretty much DOS'd your desktop by using Cgroup. So it's like that is yes, they are usually attached to a process. And in those cases, blowing away the process isn't a bad thing. But if it's the compositor process, that would be a bad thing. So it's like how to make a policy around that? It's very hard to know.
So the on-cached cash pool overhead was another problem that came up in the the C Group's discussion, and this was actually a bit of a C Group people versus DRM people mismatch in terms of what was the responsibility. DRM, one of the other DRM maintainers, was like, he sees our
Whole cache to on cached setup as a workaround for the fact that the core kernel doesn't do this. It's not like his feeling is that it should be an MM. MM should deal with on-cached pages. And the reason that's not an MMM, because the only people who ever needed this were GPUs. So nobody, you know, it was always, well, just do it in your subsystem. So that's our
Of contention has sort of never really gone away, and the C groups people are like, Well, it's you know, it's a DRM code, it's a DRM problem. And he's like, So, there's been a bit of a lock there where they just get a bit annoyed at each other. So, some of the scenarios that were happening was like, Yeah, was it C group A allocates a bunch of on-cash.
Memory and it feeds it into the shared pool. And then C group B allocates some cached memory. And then the system is under memory pressure. So at that point, B has to enter reclaim to get the on cached pages out of A's pool. And that's not, again, it's sort of
Violates the container ruling of you shouldn't cause other containers to do work that they don't need to do. But because of this fundamental, well, that's actually the MM's job, and the MM should do it, and we're just doing it as a workaround. We fell into a lot of discussions. I've kind of resolved that.
That one, at least to the point of like, I'm sort of coming down with the C groups people on that. It's like if one process allocates like a gig of uncached memory and then immediately frees it and then allocates a gig of cached memory, it should just pay that overhead on that pool and do it itself. There should be no need for like to.
Cause another process harm, or cause another process to have to go into reclaim. So I think that one we've kind of solved. The DRAM maintainer on that side is not as, you know, he has some, there are some, like when I started, I didn't use cases, I was like, this can't be real. And he would then sit down and explain to me the insane use cases that he has.
Has in the real world executing on things. And I was like, okay, yeah, I get that, but oh, it's horrible. And one of those is they would do things in certain systems where they would just start a process at boot, and it would allocate like a gig or two gigs of on-cached memory, and then just free the process would die, and it would just drop all that memory back into the pool.
Every application that started up after that would be able to use stuff out of the pool, and that would even out their overheads. I'm like, yeah, that's a thing, I could see that happening. And I've kind of dealt with that in this framework: that when Cgroup now drops pages, they go into the pair.
C group and the parent C, then it can allocate from the parent C group if it needs it. So the hierarchy is there. He still wasn't entirely happy with that because I think he still had another crazy use case where he just has he doesn't do that, but he had multiple processes all doing like what would essentially one of the main uses for the on-cache pages is scan out buffers. And he had multiple games.
They were in the scenario running, and they were all using the scan out, wanting to use the scan out, but only every few of them were using it at once. So it was like there was no need for everyone to have their own pool of fully on-cached pages for the size of your scan out. There only needs to be one set of these in the system. And with C groups, that's kind of hard to do. It's like, yeah, you have to.
To own the memory. So this is sort of one of those. I don't know how to solve that in that use case. I think we just have to deal with the fact that you're using cgroups in that use case. That's the whole point of having containers, is that they are separated and having this little thing is nice optimization, but just turn off the cgroup integration if that's what you want.
But then, so that was like the problems and where we've come from. But how do I actually move forward? How do I actually make any progress on this with with these this thing? So the first sort of thing we agreed on was let's start by at least accounting. Um so one of my first set of patches was to send out just adding some MEMCG counters for both
GPU active memory and GPU reclaimable memory. The reclaimable memory was any memory that was in the pool. So anything that once we entered reclaim we could easily give back. And then active memory was whatever's in use. Some of the first feedback from the C group's maintainers was, well, we don't really be wanting memory counters in Mem CG that aren't also VM counters.
That we can't see in PROC VM stat. So I was like, okay, yeah, let's do that first. So I went back and started and was like, well, let's add VM counters to VM for GPU Active and GPU Reclaim. I started using those for the TTM objects. And then we started adding them MCG counters on top of that and started using them. It seemed like
This is a simple plan. But not so fast. I had to step back and realize: well, MCG is very NUMA-aware, and the TTM pools are as NUMA-aware, but they're also very not the same code, and their NUMA awareness, like although it's parallel, there's no real in, you know.
They don't understand each other's new awareness, and there's, you know, have to resolve that. So that's where the two great tastes came in. I had to sort of merge the fun. So I had to start by looking at: well, how does MCG do this? List LRU is its main mechanism for keeping track of the pages in use. So I had to first
Of all, move all the TTM code that we had our own LRU in, and our own NUMA management in, and our own layers of stuff like the pools. I had to port that to list LRU. That was actually surprisingly nice. I was quite happy with that work. Then we had to make the shrinker.
The pool has that shrinker, that has to become NUMAWARE. That's not actually too bad. Once you start using list LRU, then it already has pretty good shrinker integration. So that wasn't too bad. We had another sort of, we had our own max allocation thing that was per comp per.
Like system. And I'm like, that doesn't make a lot of sense. And I moved it down to per NUMA. There's a bit of contention around that, but I think I'm going to get that past. So then, yeah, what's all those little things? We use the LRU and NUMA. So we turn on list LRU first, and then we turned on the NUMA support in the shrinker for the TTM pool.
And this is where I wrote that piece of code that said: when allocating an on-cache page, if your cgroup doesn't have any, we'll check the parent cgroup. And then when you exit, all of your on-cache pages you had at exit will go up to the parent. And that should maintain some of the hierarchy we need to see in, like, desktop scenarios and some of these other scenarios. It's not.
The ideal one for the the crazy corner cases, but that's like just turn off cgroups if you want to do crazy things. Um it's driver opt-in at the moment. Um the drivers decide which gem objects should be tracked by Mem CG. Uh all objects controlled pretty much all objects controlled by user space should get tracked.
Um there's not a lot of um internal object allocations in system memory anyway, but they probably should be tracked. We probably should we'll get to that. But right now it's just dealing with it from uh the user space objects because they're the primary place I can return enomem and tell user space that it failed its allocation and it you know it's run out of space. Um
So, yeah, TTM's page population gets a little MCG flag. But the problem here is that we populate the TTM object pages in two places. One is on the first allocation of a system memory object. So, an object that is only going to live in system memory and not device memory. The first time we allocate that, we will allocate.
All the pages for that. That makes a good place to do the accounting. We can say that it's easy to say enough mem at that point. But I've avoided doing it on eviction because I do not understand what the semantics for eviction will be. But I think for a lot of our use cases, it's good enough just to get this, especially for the system where either.
The MI300As I was dealing with, they had unified memory, but they also had no swap. So a lot of the there was no way to kick anything out. So it was like even evicting out of the system memory to swap wasn't going to happen. So they were sort of constrained in that. But for device memory, I think it's just, yeah.
Just have to leave some sort of either. We either have to figure out how to leave some slack in your system and your MCG allocation space or figure out how to get the EnomeM up to the correct place or crash the correct process or let the OOM kill or kill the right thing. Yeah, there's a bit of work there. So yeah, currently,
I'm only going to populate on that first allocation for system memory objects, which saves the problem in the in the MI300 system at least. Well, where's this going to go next? I think I've posted the patch set about eight times now, seven or eight times. It's always fun when you maintain.
A large subsystem and don't want to merge your own code. So I have to actually wait for a review from people in my group, and I don't really like putting pressure on them that much. So I've been a bit slack on it. I think I've posted it seven or eight times. I'm hoping by talking here today I can finally push it and start it next year. I've
One is, yeah, I'd like to get it out there at least and see what breaks. We've done a workaround for the customer that had this problem by using DMA buffs and a few other sort of hacks up in user space. But I'd really like to get this done. And UDMA buff was what I think we ended up using to do it. I need to have enough accounting to get us through. But I'd like to do this properly.
I actually see this being useful in some laptop scenarios that I hadn't really considered before. We don't always make the healthiest decisions in the OOM killer when we have a laptop. Like Firefox doesn't always get the right thing blown away.
And then I realized, well, yeah, actually on your standard Intel laptop, there's no tracking of the memory that's GPU memory allocations. If if you're doing a GPU memory allocation through like V Vulcan or OpenGL or DMF, it's not accounted for to the right process. So even doing that should hopefully fix some
Sort of weird problems, I would think, on constrained laptops that they would crash in maybe a healthier fashion. Not sure. But I would like to get the code out there to see if that has any impact on that sort of scenario. Yeah, like how do we handle these evictions? Should we handle them? Is there a good idea?
Anyone thinks of a good idea, definitely feel free to talk to me about it. Someone has suggested a few times as one of the other maintainers that we should just not care about this uncache stuff, that the additional speed up achieved by using it is not actually worth it. But when we shop that around to some of the Intel
maintainers of their GPU drivers and they're like, actually, I think we actually have some actual problems not doing it. Like there's a you know, it's not just a like again, AMD are like, yeah, we think it's just a need and optimization and Intel are like, yeah, no, I think some of our GPUs actually need this to function properly now, so it's like we h still have to go with it. But the question of like most of the work in this has been for that one corner case. It's like
uh is it is it really helpful? Is it probably not actually going to have a huge impact on the systems, but we probably have uh getting it right's probably important. Um yeah, like will the new code like the lot lots of client leaning onto cache pages regularly? It's probably not a likely scenario we see, but I I wanna see. But yeah, that's
I probably zoomed through that, but lunch is coming. So if anyone has any questions, please uh our discussions. Um so the NCG charges for the system memory require uh a bit of
For the memory? I'm not hearing it from. Is it? Oh no, it's just low vol. Check, check. Oh, just screwing. Right, so MAMCG charges for system memory require the memory's got a struct page associated with it. Have you not seen a problem?
With carve outs or something where you you I mean it seems like you must have al always had memory that has struct page associated with it. Um I'm trying to think we got yeah all of this all of the memory that we're using for the at least the cache to uncache pool in this is all done with struct page. Uh we yeah, I have not dealt with
Like any of the CMA carve-out area. And one thing that, yeah, in the code that I've currently submitted, so we have the pool infrastructure that we have actually covers not just cached and non-cached, it also covers DMA allocations and 32-bit DMA allocations. So we actually have more pools, and I've kind of just
Gone, Nate, we'll deal with that when somebody else gives me a machine with that and tells me this is a problem they want to solve. But right now, I'm like ignoring it. But yeah, there is a bunch of that DMA pool and stuff. But I've gone through a lot of iterations of integrating this with MemCG. I think I've gone through six different implementations of how to get MemCG in this.
Work together, but I think in the end it was always because it's GFP account flags and there's a bunch of things like that that you could use, but you don't, I didn't want to use in the end. So I think in the end, I've added another set of APIs that use struct page and set the bits on the struct page, the MCG bits.
Anyone else? Any other questions? Yeah, early lunch. All right, let's thank the speaker.