Yosemite_v5,_Metas_next_generation_modular_compute_and_storage_platform

Good morning, everybody. Good to see you all. I hope you're all having a great time at OCP this year. I know you all are the diehard compute and storage folks. 8 a.m. on the last day of OCP, so kudos to showing up here. My name is Dave Garcia, I'm a hardware engineer.
At Meta, and today I'm going to talk to you about Yosemite V5, Meta's next generation compute platform. So, first, I want to take a quick look back at the history of the platform. Yosemite has been Meta's flagship single-socket server for many years.
Now. So this was, we started back in 2015 with Yosemite V1, where we had a 20U chassis that could support up to 12 servers. This was also back when we were targeting lower TDP CPUs, in which since then CPU power has gone up significantly. So we've also had to accommodate that with our
Data designs. Over the course of 10 years, Yosemite has continued to be our primary compute resource in our data centers today, with millions of servers deployed in that timeframe, and up to seven CPU generations deployed with that. So, Yosemite is still going strong at Meta.
So, what brought us to IP5? Here, I want to go over a few key high-level requirements and drivers that got us to the current design. So, we wanted to develop a platform that will support two or more server generations across compute and storage with a focus on design reuse. And I'll be saying design and reuse.
Quite a bit, so just be prepared. We also wanted to support a larger range of server density, meaning we wanted to be able to scale up or scale down the compute, the actual server density within a rack. So that's due to the additional data center power that we have available.
in today's AI world with all the power we have available to us. We want that flexibility built in with our with this rack. And with this ability to scale up the server identity, we want to simplify the management architecture. So we'll see that we in the coming slides that we're targeting a single host BMC and a single host NIC per server.
In line with the predecessor of YB4, we wanted to continue to support high TDP CPUs, so up to 525 watts. Wanted to continue to support high memory capacity and bandwidth, so up to 16 DIMMs per server. And wanted to stay in line with the modularity of Yosemite, so being able
To support various types of configurations and server types with a single chassis. And for these last few points, I wanted to stay in line with OCP, so leveraging the ORP3 RAC, the OCP-NIC, TSFF-NIC, DCSCM, and supporting a server that aligns with a DCMHS DNO form factor.
And here in all its glory is Yosemite V5. So, YV5 is a 3 OU chassis with the ability to support up to six servers. The blades are, as you see, horizontal, in which the size is actually configurable. Configurable as in the
The configuration we're showing shows a half-width. There's also a full width available, full width being the full width of the front of the chassis. As I mentioned, it does support multiple configurations and server types. This one showing the screen specifically is a high-compute server type. In the front of the chassis, we have the DCSCM OCP.
NIC and E1S flash storage. That's for data drives and boot drive. This system is air-cooled, so system the fans would be accessible from the rear side. So here we have a high-level architectural black diagram of the system.
From this diagram, I'll start at the left at the Medusa board. So we have 48 volts coming in via Medusa cable to the onboard power converters to convert that 48 to 12. That 12 volts will be sent off to the paddle board, which is that small card there at the top between the Medusa and the server. Like I mentioned, we have.
We are air-cooled, so the fans are directly connected to the Medusa board PCB at the rear. I should also mention that the Medusa board will have an FPGA that we refer to as the chassis manager, aka CM, and I'll get into more about that here in a bit. The paddle board that I just mentioned, that's a one-to-one with the
server for each server of the of the chassis. So that twelve volt comes into the the paddleboard. And that paddleboard houses a twelve volt HSC to provide that twelve volt control to the downstream server. Um and then via cable from twelve volts via cable from the paddleboard to the server, we have the twelve volt provided to the downstream hardware.
And then from the server on, any additional power from there will be derived from the server. In this specific example, we're showing a configuration that supports CXL expansion in addition to additional flash storage with the SSDs in the bottom right of the image. So in this example, we're showing CXL expansion being supported with power.
Provided by a PIC power connection and the CXL PCIe lanes, the PCI Gen 5, coming across via MCIO connectivity. You can see on the looking at the server that the right edge, the OCP NIC and DCSEM, both supported via the 4C connection. And then on the bottom, you see the little expansion.
Board that supports the additional flash storage. So, like I mentioned earlier, we wanted to simplify the management architecture of the platform. So, here we're showing a very simplified diagram reflecting that. So, here we're showing the SIG server.
That are capable to be supported in a chassis, each server getting its own BMC and NIC, and then each server having its own 12-volt HSE. So the BMC will have direct connectivity to the CM on the Medusa board that travels all the way through the server, through the paddleboard, and up to the Medusa board. So the CM does control.
The fans of the system and controls the power of the Medusa board, which in turn controls the power of the system. So the BMC has visibility and access and control over all that with that connectivity. The CM is an FPGA-based device that's located on the management board or the Medusa board.
And the direct connectivity from the BMC to the CM is via I2C. And I should also mention, like I meant that I just touched on, was fan control. So, like I said, CM control is the fan speed of the system. And the way that works is each BMC will provide the CM with its own fan speed requests.
And then VSM logic in the CM, the CM will effectively choose the highest fan speed that it was sent and drive the fans with that request. So here we have an exploded view of the chassis. This is just showing with the sheet metal removed, so you can get a better view of the connectivity.
Starting at the rear, we have the Medusa board with the fans connected directly to the PCB. In the middle of the board, you see the Medusa cable coming out the rear to connect to the rack bus bar. The two large heat sinks in the middle, that's for the power converters to convert that 48 to 12 volts. And then you can see in the bottom right, we have the cable.
Cabling coming from the Medusa board to the paddleboard to provide 12 volts to that paddleboard with the HSE being right in the middle. And then from the HSE to the downstream hardware, also via cabling. In this specific configuration, we're showing a blade configuration, so with a half-width, and also again showing CXL.
Optionality for this. So, within that space that we have between the Medusa and the server, we have some space for different hardware to support your application. And again, here we're just showing an optionality for CXL expansion. Here's a mechanical view. So, now we're showing a tray configuration.
So, the full width. So, at the left, you can see the tray removed with the lid removed. So, starting at the very top right, you have the, again, the paddleboard. That's where the paddleboard will be located in the tray. From there, it'll be connected to the Medusa via the power cable. And then, from the paddleboard to the server, we have the cabling provide 12 volts.
And just like in the blade configuration, here we're also showing in a tray configuration as well C excellion. So in this uh diagram or this example we have the CXL sitting to the left of the motherboard with power coming to the the C exce in this example pig power and MCIO for the for the um high speed.
Excel link. I mentioned earlier we have the ability for SSD expansion. So, this is showing an example in the front with the two SSDs in the bottom left. And that can be configurable to your application. So, if you want more storage, that SSD expansion board can grow to what your whatever your application requires. Here I'm just showing an example.
Rack layout with the YB5. So we plan to use a 600 amp bus bar. So the rack can support up to 12 chassis. And this layout we're just showing a middle rack switch, which can be a wedge 400 in this case. So as I mentioned many times, YP5 is configured.
To various types of server types and configs. So, as we talked about in this presentation so far, the top left is a high compute server type. Going to the top right, we have a disaggregated flash server type, which is using the full-width tray. Going to the bottom left, a direct attached server type, and in the bottom right, a cloud gaming server type. So, you see the various range of data.
Different applications you can support with one chassis. So, for the call to action, we do have a draft specification submitted. The final specification will be uploaded in 26 as we near MP when it gets finalized. Within six months of MP, we will be submitting all the design collateral to OCP. So, you'll have full access to everything that we're showing here.
We encourage you to collaborate and build your next compute solution on top of YV5 to keep that strong collaboration going. And we do have a mechanical chassis back at the NIC booth. So I'll be hanging out there for a couple of hours if you want to stop by, take a look, chat, or have any questions for me. Thank you.
I'll ask a question. Oh, should I? So you have a long tradition of doing multi-host on uh Yosemite, yet I wasn't clearly seeing that here. Can you talk a little bit about your multi-host strategy?
Yeah, so historically multi-host we've we've I wonder if I should I get off and talk directly? I know we're out of time. Yeah, we're out of time to talk. Okay, I'll come over there and talk to you.
