_AI Stack_ Accelerating AI Infrastructure_The Role of 400G and PCIe 8.0 in Next-Gen Interconnects

Welcome to Accelerating AI Infrastructure, the role of 400GIG and PCIe 8.0 and NextGen Interconnects. This is a webinar presented by the SNIA Data Storage and Networking Forum.
My name is Eric Smith, and I'll be your host and moderator for today's webinar. I'm pleased to introduce you to our expert speakers, Anthony Constantine, a distinguished member of technical staff at Micron, and Tom Palkert, a system architect at Xamtech. Before we get into the content, I wanted to provide a quick overview of the SNEA community.
SNIA is an industry organization that develops global standards and delivers education on all technologies related to data. SNIA is comprised of 200 industry-leading organizations, 2,000 active contributing members, and 50,000 participating IT end users and technologists worldwide.
The SNEA data storage and networking community, also known as the DSN community, is an active group within SNEA that provides vendor-neutral education and insights for applying network storage standards and associated technologies to a broad spectrum of end-to-end solutions. So, some logistics for today. The slides for this session are available under the attachment.
Tab at the bottom of your console. Now, if you want to ask a question during the presentation, you can do so by selecting the Ask a Question option and entering your question there. All questions asked during the webinar will be answered either live or as a part of a question and answer blog that we try to post no more than two weeks after the presentation.
Webinar concludes. Please, please take the time to rate the session and ideally leave a comment, even if you need to leave early for some reason. The reason is we take your feedback very seriously, and because we greatly value your time, we want to make sure you are getting the most out of each session as possible. So, if you want to interact with people like the presentation,
Of the session and other industry professionals, consider joining SNEA in the DSN community. We meet every week on Thursdays at 10 a.m. Eastern, 11 a.m. Eastern. Finally, I wanted to call your attention to the SNEA legal notice. This provides SNEA's copyright notice regarding the use of the material. SNEA is not providing any legal notes.
Legal advice, and there are no warranties expressed or implied. So, if you want to reference this material, please do so at your own risk. And just before we get started, I wanted to quickly mention the AI Stack webinar series of which this session is a part. It's a comprehensive webinar program designed to demystify artificial intelligence from its foundation.
Concepts and how you apply it to real-world applications. The series is crafted for individuals who are new to AI and aims to build a strong practical understanding of the entire AI technology stack. So those with more practical AI experience can selectively attend whatever webinars they want, skipping the ones that cover familiar ground, and focus in on.
Sessions that provide additional insights or education for them. And the reason that we put this series together was that AI, I mean, it's transforming everything. It's impacting industries, workflows, daily life, and it definitely can seem overwhelming due to its technical depth and how fast it's evolving. So we're trying.
To address that by starting from the basics, building step-by-step, connecting theory to practice, providing demos, and preparing you for real-world challenges. So, with that said, I'm gonna bring up the agenda next and pass it over to Anthony to get us started. Thanks, Eric, and hello, everyone that's listening. Today, we're gonna cover five.
Different topics as part of this discussion. The first one, we're just doing a quick intro into the physical arc infrastructure. Tom's going to go through the copper connections and challenges to 400 gig. I'll go through the PCIe cabling, the SSDs, and the road to PCIe 8. Tom's going to go through the inflection point of copper and optical, and then.
I'll finish off with the AI needs of SSDs. So let's jump into the introduction in the physical infrastructure. First off, why faster? I know everyone wants to go faster, but you usually, from an engineering perspective, you usually want a reason why. So, what we've been observing is two major trends in.
Storage for AI. Storage provides a supplemental memory capacity from that perspective. And then a lot of cold data is warmer. And what this ends up meaning is that you have a lot of data that needs to be moved rapidly outside the box. You have a lot of data. In general, it's just a bunch of data movement outside the box, inside the box.
And really, storage needs to keep up with this data movement as well. And ultimately, then the interconnects need to keep up, which is a lot of where Tom and I focus. Because not keeping up means data is not getting acted upon. You've got basically delays in getting data processed.
Processed. So, what is this box we talk about? So, this is the overly simplified AI box. Take this as an example. This is not everything looks this way, but this is a good example of what we wanted to share. And so, you can kind of see the, I've
Tried labeling the interconnects for what's going on inside and outside the box. You've got outside the box, you've got Ethernet going out to the network. Inside the box, you've got PCIe and you've got various chip-to-chip interconnects.
We chose to kind of keep these generic and just call it a chip to chip, but these are the kind of higher speed connections that you're going between CPU to GPU, GPU to GPU, and so on and so forth. And also, those same interconnects are being used from like a box to box or from a rack perspective, maybe sled to sled.
Sled. So it's kind of outside, but outside the box, but it's not going out past, you know, the size of the rack itself. And, you know, if I wanted to compare a box in a wild, I've got a picture of a box that has been shared before, and you can kind of see, you know, the
General placement of devices in that. And it generally fits that generic box model. And like I said, it's not one size fits all, but it's a good primer for what an example AI system would look like. And so, with that, I'm going to hand off to Tom.
Thanks, Anthony. So, I'm going to take it a step further and we're going to talk about 400 gig. A lot of talk in the industry about this and why we need a lot of questions about why we actually need to go to the next speed. So, I'll start with that side of it. I'm going to say, you know, why 400 gig? What's the need? And then we're going to, I've kept things at a fair
Low level here. So, I'm going to talk about the basics and break down channels and models and give you some ideas and future work. I've also thrown in these pages. I just think it's valuable to get the opinion of somebody. So, I'm going to give you my opinion on these. I put those that text in red, and just a disclaimer: those opinions are my own, they may be shared.
By others in the industry, but I don't claim to represent any company or standards in those opinions. So, first one is why 400 gig. And so, for this, I thought I'd actually go to an end user. So, here I used Meta. Halil made his presentation at the Ethernet Alliance meeting in December.
And the whole issue is here. He is just saying that beachfront. So, beachfront is just the density of these balls and bumps that are used. And in this case, here, you'll see he's using this as a die tied to a this is called an interposed die, that's like a substrate kind of.
It's not really a package, but it's called a substrate. In some cases, it is a package. But those balls and hitches on those is limited because of the size and mechanical structure and things like that. So you can't get beyond these physical limitations. And so the only way you can get things faster.
Is or and you get more data in and out, as Anthony mentioned, is by making things faster. So he also expanded on this and said, okay, here's a picture of this substrate, and these are pads sitting on top of a substrate or a package, and these go into a
In this case, a copper cable, which is a very small gauge copper wire, because it has to be. And those limit and pitch restrictions also drive the physical requirements or physical abilities of these AI applications. And so you can't make these any smaller because.
Physical limitations. So, the only thing you can do is make them faster. So, this is back to what Anthony just showed. The ones I show here in orange, these are the ones I'm talking about. I'm not discussing the PCIe connections to the SSDs or the Ethernet side. So, the only thing we are addressing in the SNEA SFF.
Group are these GPU to GPU copper connections, and I'm going to stay focused on that later. On we'll have a couple slides on the transition to optics, but for now, I'm just strictly copper connections here. So, again, to do this, I want to go back to the basics: is how do you design this high-speed copper interconnect? And we're going to discuss all that.
These different options here, modulation package, the breakout region, which is how you get out of the package. And we're talking about trace routing connectors and cables. So, first one is modulation. So, the days of NRZ are gone. So, you no longer have a one and a zero. You now
Have multiple levels. So, PAM4 has been used since the 50 gigabit per second days. And I've drawn these roughly to scale because the voltage limits are limited by the CMOS technology in the DSP. And you can see here what you do when you go from a PAM 4 to a PAM 6 to a PAM 8.
Is you get the eyes become the height gets greatly reduced, but the width is greatly improved. So I said I try to draw you sort of a scale where the PAM 4 is, you can see it's got three levels, and the PAM 6 has five levels, and the PAM 8 has seven levels, and you can see the width of these getting wider.
Wider as you go out. So that turns out to be a Nyquist frequency or signaling rate issue here. So you can see if you're a classic SI guy, you're like, okay, my Nyquist frequency is very important. My SNR is important. So if you go to PAM8, you'll see a Nyquist frequency is 75 gigahertz. And this is.
Excellent because currently for the 224 PAM4, we're in the 55 gigahertz range. You're like, okay, I can handle that. But you've got an SNR reduction of 6.3 dB. That's a huge change. And that requires a lot more extensive use of forward error correction and things like that because more noise means more errors.
That's a that signal noise reduction is a big deal. So, if you go to the compromised solution, which is PAM 6, you're under 90 gigahertz, 3.7 SNR, still bad, but not horrible. And if possible, what you'd love to do is to stay at PAM 4, but now you're at 120 gigahertz. And as you'll see later, that is a big jump, and it's being very hard.
To do in the current systems. So, my opinion on this one in my discussions, I'm not a DSP vendor, but I've got some experience in that area. And I believe that the current DSP designs can do any one of these. They can do either one of these three and they can make them all work. Obviously, they'll have.
Higher bid error rate at the PAM 8, and they'll suffer from some bandwidth degradations at PAM 4, but they can actually design any one of these three, so therefore, they're not going to limit that path to the PAM modulation. So, now we're going to talk a little bit about the package. So, this package in the
Standard way you go is you have a ball on a die, it goes into a package, and that package has a trace that gets routed out to a bigger ball which is connected to a printed circuit board. So, the key is to get all these dense ball pitch things here, get a trace out between all of them. And this is obviously only two-dimensional, get a trace.
Out between all these balls and get it out someplace past the package where you can get some real do some real work with it. So this is an SI problem because every time you make a chain or say a bend in this trace, you're going to introduce SI problems. And you can see here when you come out.
You've got this stub, which is due to the VIA, and you can do all sorts of things to eliminate that, but it's still going to be something. And when you get out here to where you really want to do some routing, you've also generally have another stub, which could be an AC coupling cap, it could just be transitioned to a different layer. And people do things like skip layers and other.
You know, obviously, back drilling to make this better, but it is still an SI problem. And this is just getting out of the package. So, we're going to talk a little bit about the other side of it. So, now, if you're worried about getting out of the package, the way you do is you just don't exit the package, you keep everything.
Right on top of the package. So that doll, that ball on the die gets ruddered into the package over a short distance and gets ruddered to a pad that sits on top of the package. And generally, we call this co-package copper. Okay, and this eliminates this whole breakout region. And you'll see later, I'll show you some SI.
Curves of this. This makes it, I wanted to say the best, but it's an excellent SI solution going forward. So, my opinion, you'll see some more on this, is that 400 gig is going to require better packeted material. So, even this trace here needs to improve, and it's going to require the CPC routing.
This is a big step. Not only I'm saying you got to get better packages, you got better packages, and you have to have them capable of this co-package copper pads. So here's the trace routing, and this is beyond the package. So you'll see here, this is just the package escape right there. And now you have to do some kind of AC coupling.
On the board, and that introduces more signal integrity issues. And there's, you can go to the SI signal integrity journal has lots of articles and things about how to minimize this AC coupling cap signal integrity problems. And then once you get there, your next step is to run that trace as far as you can.
And obviously, you want to make it as wide as you can, and you have problems with surface roughness and trace width and crosstalk and all these issues. And then you're going to get to another package over here where you have the same issues with escaping and everything. So, trying to solve all these things, people do spend lots of time and effort to do this.
And you have all these SI problems. So, my opinion is it's just not gonna work. So, and then you can see lots of, I can show you lots of presentations that show these traces, and they just do not have the bandwidth required. So, my opinion is it's not gonna work. Therefore, you're gonna have to do this coping.
Package copper that I show, and here's the channel for co-packaged copper. So, this has a Twin X 92 ohm twinx cable. In this case, it's 400 millimeters, and it goes from one package to another package. And then those traces in the package come out, and what I'm showing you here is sort of the separation.
Between the connector on the package and the package traces. We do this for signal integrity reasons, just for doing simulations. And then you can see the same thing on the other side. So here we've assumed a one-millimeter trace on the package, and you can see here we've got test points, and these are where we.
Draw standards and write specs for. So, connectors. The connector bandwidth, because this, sorry, I'm going to click back here quick. There's no connector here. Okay, you can call this a connector, but it's really not. It's just a monitor to the pad and it goes across here.
Everybody's like, okay, I need a connector to do this board-to-board kind of stuff. And the connector bandwidth is right now the biggest issue that we have faced in achieving this 400 gig. The insertion loss of that connector and the crosstalk are key in the decision making for the optimum modulation bandwidth. Unfortunately,
I went to a lot of connector guys, Samtech included, and they would not allow me to share any off-the-board connector data that they had. So that just goes to tell you that this is very advanced work and people are keeping it under wraps for now. But suffice to say that those connector bandwidth is so far not been shown sufficiently.
Efficient to support the higher modulation rates. But I am going to show you at least one proposed connector in a little bit. So, the cable loss, that's the other part. So, I showed you this co-package copper, it has 2x cable on it. Will the twin X work up to those frequencies? And it turns out it does. Unfortunately,
This graph is one of them I can get people to share, and it stops at 70 gigahertz. But I will just throw out there that I have seen graphs that extend this line basically out all the way to 120 gigahertz required for PAM4. So the loss definitely increases, but it's still, it is not the limiting factor. In other words, it just doesn't.
Drop like a rocket continues in a very linear fashion. So that's the good news that the TwinX cables are going to work. So this, I'm going to try to show you some actual channels because I mean, that seems like that's a good thing to look at. So here are some actual channels from Meta.
And again, Halil was nice enough to share these with me. And you can see that so the green one here is his current 224 gig channel. Okay. And you've got these, the blue line there is the current 224 gig data band or whatever frequency it's called, Nyquist frequency.
Frequency. That also corresponds, by the way, to a PAM 16 frequency for 400 gig. I didn't even consider that one because the SR is so bad. But those are at this frequency here. You can see the green, it works, right? The exertion loss is down like 35 dB, but it.
It's pretty linear and it's not, the loss is not terrible. That same channel is improved on the blue line, and it's roughly the same at that frequency. Now, as you get up to the 400 gig, you see the PAM8, the existing channel just drops like a rock.
So that says your 224-gig channels are not going to work for any modulation at 400 gig because the insertion loss is too high. So now you design a better one using all these techniques I just sort of glossed over, but you designed a better one. And you can see at Pam8, it's feasible.
You've got a 40 dB loss and it works. At PAM 6, it's starting to roll off, okay, but it may still be feasible. You're at minus 50, which is bad enough, but it still may be feasible to work. Now, if you drive these all the way over to the 110 gigahertz, which this is, I think it's 100.
Or something he's applying. But if you go all the way out there, you can see it's just off the chart. So it has no chance of working at Pam 4. So the question here is: this is their 224 channels, they're out. This is their improved channel. It has some chance of working, but it uses.
Obviously, you'd say, hey, that's still not a good enough channel. So, the question that we were asking and discussing with Meta was: well, maybe we just need to wait a year or two till these printed circuit board technology advances to the next generation. And the answer we got was no.
Basically, if you can't make this work, we'll find some other way to do it because this AI revolution is progressing and it's not waiting. So, my opinion, based on talking to end users, is that we cannot wait for an improved channels. We need to solve this in some way, in some form, in the next.
Next year, or these whatever, the AI solution people will find their own way. So now I'm going to break down a little bit of this channel in a little more detail. So here we've got a complete channel with a die, a package, co-packaged copper, a cable.
A connector and an external cable. And this whole thing is: you're going to see all these packages with the internal AC. So we're going to go for the die, we're going to internal AC coupling because we don't have any place to put the AC coupling cap outside. We're going to reduce the parasitics. We're going to go with 92 ohms instead of 100 ohms. In the package, we're going to get better.
Materials, we're going to get good trace designs, and we're going to have CPC pads. Then we're going to have flyover cables, and you're going to see the impact of that. And then I'm also going to show you a front panel connector because we need that in this solution. So, this is some great work done by Socionext.
And they have shown and they've actually put together some packages with different trace length, and they've measured and simulated the insertion loss of these packages. So you can see here is at 224, these are excellent packages. They've got between three and six dB of.
Insertion loss based on whether it's 18 millimeters or 26 millimeters, and you can see that's that's a very feasible thing to do. You take these same packages and you run them at let's go to PAM 8, and you can see these are still very workable, right? You're talking like 60 to 90.
And then, if you run them over to PAM6, you're out in probably 9 to 12 dB kind of numbers. So, this says that these existing packages or the packages that they're using, which is existing materials, that they'll work, but it's still going to be a challenge because if you run this thing out to PAM6, you're talking.
Talking about 9 dB package on both sides of the link. Now you're talking about 18 dB of package insertion loss, and that's a pretty high loss. And that's going to limit the distance you can run. But as Anthony showed in the first part, there, when you're running from GPU to GPU, that distance is not very far. And so this is completely feasible to run.
For those kind of distances, whether this will get you a three-meter back lane cable, that's going to be the problem. So, if you take these same packages, run them down to PAM 4 over here at 110 gigahertz, you're down at about, let's say, this one may be down at 18 to 20 dB, and that puts you at 40 dB.
For two packages, that is very difficult to handle with a cable in between. So, next. So, this is a complete channel, as I mentioned, with the package die, the traces are in.
The package and then routing it over here with the CPC connector on top and the cable included. So, when you do that, this is the simulated, these are simulated graphs here. And you can see here, this runs pretty smooth, right, all the way down to about 100 gigahertz, and even past.
That. It's still pretty smooth, maybe up to 110. And with that, this tells me that you can run a PAM6 400 gig chip-to-chip, and it's going to work because you're going to be down at minus, say, minus 10 dB of insertion loss, and that's a nice number to be at.
Going to give you good bit error rate, you've got good signal integrity, it's going to work great. The interesting thing here is for the chip-to-chip application, even though this drops off very steeply at around 110, if you look at the pulse response, you'll see that the pulse response is still good enough, and you have a
You actually have a shot at running PAM4 chip to chip. It'll be difficult, but it might work. So now let's look at a front panel pluggable. So now you have a die. I've still assumed the co-package copper. I've still assumed a twin X cable at 400 millimeters.
Case I replaced the other package with a connector, and I mentioned this connector is all important. And you'll see here, I do not have the individual connector graph, but I do have the entire channel from end to end. And this is courtesy of Amphenol who put this channel together.
So, when you do this, here's the nice channel you get. And this looks pretty good. It looks pretty nice roll-off out to about 100 gigahertz. And if you look at the PAM6, you've got 30 dB down at the PAM 6 modulation rate. So, this is the PAM 6 will work pretty.
Pretty well, although 30 dB down is this is getting to, it still has to put another cable on it, still has to have the other side, so still not the best, but it looks like it would work. If you run up to the PAM4, they didn't even bother running it out past the 100 gigahertz. So you need to hit 110 or 120, and they didn't even bother graphing it out there.
So, this one for the chip to module channels, I'm saying PAM6 is probably the only that's going to work with these things. So, again, this graph is produced at amphenol. I added the red lines to give us some Nyquist frequency numbers.
Okay, with that, back to Anthony. Okay, thanks, Tom. Now, I'm going to touch on the PCIe connectors and cablings for the SSDs up to PCIe 8. Part of the reason why I wanted to talk about the cabling to the
SSD is because it is a pretty complicated route. It's a pretty long route considering it's within the box because, you know, from a traditional device perspective, you have your root complex and then you have some motherboard routing. Then you go through a connector, which hits a cable, and then that goes.
And then traditionally, this would go to a back plane, and then you've got your SSD connector or your connector to your SSD, and then eventually that finds its way to its endpoint. You know, this could be, you know, maybe a meter of cable plus a bunch of motherboard routing, backplane routing, et cetera. And this was the traditional topology for.
Many years. So, SSDs are kind of a good canary in the coal mine for the how far can I stretch the PCIe channel? So, kind of going into this, you know.
One of the key measures for the channel itself is insertion loss. I kind of look at this as a first-order way of how to approximate how far you can connect between the root port and the endpoint. If the channel loss is greater than the target,
Then typically you're going through one or more mitigations. You know, reduce channel length, if that is at all possible. You know, that could be moving your connector around for your host board. You know, you may need active components, which is like retimers, which adds costs to the system. There's lower loss PCB materials.
Well, which also adds cost. And so I kind of, you know, ranked a, you know, for PCBs at least at 16 gigahertz, which is the NyQuist for PCIe 5 and 6. You know, I have my own like cheap, less cheap, not cheap. You can call this, you know.
Mid-loss, low-loss, ultra-low loss. You know, there's several different ways to classify this, but I like using the cheap and not cheap method. So, you know, the motherboard routing itself is somewhere around 1.5 dBs per inch. As you go down in cost or as you make it more expensive, you can get.
Get some of that length back. And that's helped us, you know, through PCIe 5. It's helping us through PCIe 6. As I go to 7, though, I'm doubling my Nyquist frequency. I'm going from 16 gigahertz to 32 gigahertz. My insertion loss target from 6 to 7 has changed a little bit. I've gotten a little bit of upside.
But you know, if I look at the current estimates right now, and I'm estimating the SSD one, by the way, but if I look at you know, well, the root ports, you know, a little takes a db, you know, SSD maybe gains a db, you know, everything else, you know, has about 20 dBs, and we got to go figure out, you know.
What is the loss for this, you know, maybe a one-meter-mated cable, the SSD connector itself, and the PCIe routing budget? And this is part of the challenge here. And so the data I'm showing right now, Muadine, who's running.
The PCI SIG EWG presented us back several months ago at a CINIA developer conference. And one of the things he shows here is the loss over frequency. And what you can see is at 32 gigahertz.
You know, your PCB routing for insertion loss is about 70% worse. You go from 0.7 dB to 1.2 dB or 1 dB to 1.7 dB. So, and those curves aren't getting much better. So, as we look out towards PCIe 8, for instance,
Distance, you know, the curves aren't leveling off too much. So, one of the things that, you know, and one of the things with copper cabling is that, you know, this does help the insertion loss. You know, your insertion loss does.
Get better. It's probably somewhere between 5 and 10x, but it also degrades over frequency just the same. So even that one-meter cable, which might be saving you because you may be able to do more over it, is also getting worse. And so trying to make this channel work.
You know, it gets harder. So, what are, and on top of that, so you've got also the return loss. You know, return loss is effectively reflective power that didn't make it to the destination. You know, you've got all these in the system itself, you've got all these impedance discontinuities. You know, anytime you transition from
From die to package, package to motherboard, motherboard to connector, connector to cable, those are creating little impedance discount news. And if you route your board pretty terribly, or you have VIAs, or you do stuff like that, all that contributes to this. This also.
Becomes a larger problem at higher speeds. And so, what are some of the things that we can do to resolve these challenges? Well, we've already kind of started tackling one of these, and that's the reducing the connector topology. So, we've this has provided both an insertion loss and return loss reduction. What we've done is we've gone from the traditional.
Three connector backplane to this two-connector back plane. And so, what that does is we have a connector. You still have the signal round on the board, but you then have a connector that goes through the cable, same as the original one. But instead of having a backplane, basically the cable connects directly to the SSD connector itself.
Device connector and the mid-plane kind of serves as a fixture. You could have your low-speed routing, you know, like your sidebands or power coming in there. But this effectively eliminates a lot of that, you know, a decent amount of that loss. If you think about it, you've eliminated that back plane in one connector. So
You know, that's reducing, you know, the in the back plane routing might be a couple inches, maybe three inches. You know, all that adds up. And so that gains me back some maybe motherboard routing, some extra cable length, et cetera. And to the return loss reduction, I'm also eliminating those reflection points.
Points. So, a lot of good stuff comes here. And we've already been implementing some of this stuff in hybrid cables. And I've got a few examples here that I'm to share, but these are stuff SFFTA 1016 and SFFTA 1035 are both published specifications.
By Sunia. And they both are hybrid cables. You can see the cable coming in directly to the connector. You see it mounts into a board connector, but that board connector is serving for, like I said, as kind of a fixture to keep the connector in a
Location and you know, the PCB routing itself for low-speed or the stuff that doesn't need the cabling, you know, or it could go through a separate cable like power and sidebands and stuff. And we've also got another kind.
Connector that's under development in the SFF technical workgroup, which is called SFFTA 1044. So, did we solve all the problems? Well, yes, no, kind of. For PCIe 7, with the not cheap materials, yes, and depending on the, you know,
Know, this is all about system design at the end of the day. If I can reduce my cable links or I can reduce my motherboard links, you know, I can find ways to make things work, right? It becomes an engineering return on investment exercise. You know, what can I do to gain?
Certain places here. As we look out to PCIe 8, though, this gets much, much harder. You know, and I'm kind of looking at it right now: are we going to, do we need active components and how are we going to do it? Because from what Tom shared earlier, right, it's this, this is not easy. And the longer you make the
Route, the harder it gets. And that's below the 400 gig that he was talking about, right? So, you know, some of the enablers that we would be exploring as we go forward and are exploring is, you know, is active copper cables. Maybe you have a retimer at one or both ends of the cable itself.
You know, optical cables, PCI SIG recently introduced a direct drive VCN, you know, which provides a way to have an optical signal go across a PCIe interface. And then a little bit ingest.
You know, I've got the not, not cheap materials, you know, but that will only go so far as well. And so, a lot of these are efforts in order to what we have to do for, you know, looking forward to PCIe 8. And PCIe 8, you know, does, you know, it's further than PCIe 7 at this point, but these are things that we need to start.
Considering in some of these, looking at some of these problems going forward. So and with that, I'm handing off back to Tom. Okay, thank you very much. So I was asked to address
When I think that optical will hit more of a mainstream in AI. So I'm going to address a little bit of that and give you some of my opinions. But I did want to mention the modulation issue. When we go into optical, all of the optical presentations for 400.
gig are all being done with PAM4. And in case you're not aware, the optical signals tend to be very much noise limited. Copper cables tend to be very much bandwidth limited. And so those two at this least we have managed in the past to maintain a single modulation form for both optical and copper.
So, what I've shown you here is a potential break from that common modulation. So, there's a very good chance that you will see PAM6 for copper connections and PAM4 for optical connections. Where this transition happens is probably in the optical module.
And as I mentioned in the earlier slides, the DSP can actually do any of the three, PAM4, 8, 4, 6, or 8. The question now is being addressed is: can they do both? And that seems to be a very difficult thing for a DSP to do both, PAM4 and PAM6. But sorry, I wanted to.
Throw that out there as we start about optical. So, the inflection point here, I took some of this stuff from NVIDIA, and they show what is a standard routing, which is a switch going through a package, going through a pinned circuit board, and then it comes up to the port. I guess this is an I/O port.
It has a cage on it, a connector, and then it goes out through a DSP in the module, and that gets converted to light and it gets sent out. So, that all is the way it's done today. I wanted to throw that out there. There are some people, and NVIDIA is one of them, that have said the world's going co-package optics. So, the bottom one shows the same thing, except it has a
Very similar to a co-package copper connections on the package, except instead of putting a copper cable, you put an optical module there. And that optical module has fiber coming out of it, which routes to the front panel. So you can imagine that has a lot of good signal integrity issues, but it also has some mechanical problems with putting.
Light and optics on top of a package. So, this is what a customer or an end user is doing. And I wanted to show you what's really being done in the standards today. IEEE writes these specs, right? And we spend a lot of time trying to find what those channel losses are. Current channel loss is 32 dB.
So, this host, which has a DSP on it, it drops down through the package to the trace. It has the escape region. It routes to a front panel pluggable module with a DSP inside it. In this case, the AC coupling cap is inside the module, and that enhances the signatory to that trace. And that gets converted to light and gets sent out. So, that is.
Working. We've written specs around that. We continue to improve those at IEEE. And that's the way it's done at 200 gig. So if you can take that same trace, drop it back to about 22 dB, you get something. And the way you do that is by doing this co-package copper ID that I showed you previously.
For 400 gig. If you do that at 200 gig, you can drop that channel to 22 dB. And I show the DSP in the optical module, but that DSP could potentially disappear. And that's being done by the LPO MSA, which is writing specs around that. So you can get a 200 gig optical solution without the DSP, which has a lot of advantages in terms.
Saving power costs, things like that at 200 gig, and that's being done. The other one is, as I showed you, you can do a full optical connection on top of this thing, you know, the CPO connection, and you have the DSP in the module, and you'll see there's no DSP anywhere except.
In the, or sorry, not in the module, on the ASIC, there's no DSP in the system except on the ASIC. And that has big impacts to cost and power. So, again, this channel loss is being defined at 12 dB. There's some discussion of pushing it, it's probably gonna get pushed to 15 dB. And that,
It gives you good signal integrity, low insertion loss. Whether or not this will work at PAM4 is a big debate in the industry, but it might. And then you're going to make this directly to the modulator and then go out optically. The laser itself in this idea is in a front panel pluggable module.
And the optics is or optics is routed inside the box, and this laser will supply generally eight modulators supply with a single laser. So that gets the laser off of the top of the package, which is important for CPO applications. So, my opinions here.
Is for large-scale adoption of AI, first of all, you need to support front-panel pluggable modules. These are Ethernet-like connections, and you need to do that. So, therefore, you will have these co-packaged copper traces running with TwinX cable across that will directly connect to this front panel pluggable modules.
Module. Whether that will be backwards compatible to 200 gig is probably not going to happen in my opinion. But there will be a front panel pluggable module that will operate at 400 gig. And this DSP will be inside of it. And this is more of a traditional look. And from the outside, you may not be able to tell that this.
Is 200 versus 400. That module, these are based on 200 gig numbers that I've seen. That's about 30 watts for one module. And I've got lots of dollar signs there. So it's going to be expensive and high power. Again, this is based on the 200 gig. So that is definitely going to go up, whether it doubles.
Hard to say. A lot of work being done on the thermals for liquid cooling and things like that. So, this will be there at 400 gig, and this is the solution that's going to happen. So, that's a given, and they'll support 500 meters up to 40 kilometers. Okay. Now, you say, okay, that's already happened, it's been happening forever. What about getting it into the short?
To reach inside the box or the rack to rack or the even sled to sled kind of things inside the racks. So, in order to do that, I took a shot at it. And if you take this laser power distribution module, that has to be improved. And there are
Companies that are working on that to get lower insertion loss coupling to the lasers and to the modulators, and probably they're going to be able to double the number of modulators supported per laser. That's going to be very important because there's a high cost of this laser here. Okay. In addition, right, these CP, these pads on this thing, it must.
Be shared between copper and optics. So, if you can make these same pads be used for both copper and optics, then you've got a solution that will sort of enable the CPO because it's going to be there anyways. Okay, the DSP, in my opinion, will stay the same. It does not need to get the copper DSP will support.
The linear optical modulators for single mode lasers through this multi-mode, who knows? But let's just talk about single mode between there. There's been enough work and simulations done that that will work. So, if you do this, what I've just described, double the laser count and make these.
Modulators have common ports, you'll get down to something that's about a five-watt solution. Okay, that to me is much more tenable for an AI solution. And whether you'll get these, I put the reach at 100 meters, and I think that's where it needs to be. So I think if it's going to penetrate, somebody's going to have to come.
Up with a 5-watt solution for CPO that goes 100 meters, and then you'll start to see more adoption of optics inside AI applications. And I think I've got one or two minutes to talk about this, but this is being looked at by a number of end users.
NVIDIA has announced a big effort in this area. Whether it was going to be adopted is going to be a lot dependent on its reliability. And Meta has published two studies on this, and they're actually seeing excellent reliability from this.
CPO applications. It's even, they're saying it's even much better than the front panel pluggable because the mechanical problems of plugging this module in are actually seeing what they call link flaps because there's some issues when you plug it in, it doesn't always mate the same as it did the last time. So when you take a module out, plug it in.
My own personal experience there was if you have a 36-port switch and you unplug all 36 ports, put in a new switch, plug in all 36 ports again, generally we've seen that two of them will not work anymore. So, with that kind of reliability numbers, just roughly you're saying, oh, maybe CPL will.
Work. So, if those numbers can be proven out, then I think you'll see much more adoption of the CPO. That is the end. Anthony. Okay. Now, let me spend some time talking about the AI needs of SSDs. To circle back to that first slide.
You know, storage provides supplemental memory capacity. What does this really mean? Higher bandwidth and IOPS are needed. This also means more power. And this can be called an AISSD. There's a lot of names for it, but this is the name I'm going to use today. So the second bullet I'll touch on in a few slides.
So, what is the AI SSD? These devices are driving storage bandwidth. So, when I was talking about PCIe 7 and PCIe 8, these would be the devices that are wanting that. What you're seeing is you got higher bandwidth on PCIe.
Higher backend bandwidth, you know, from my company's perspective, we use Onfi. You know, there's other backends as well. And it requires a high-performance ASIC. And, you know, power is not going down. Last I checked. So, you know, it won't stay the same, but it also won't double. So, you know,
If I look, you know, this is kind of a swag, but it's probably a greater than 50% increase going from PCIe six to seven and seven to eight. Power is a problem we need to go solve. And I'm looking at this more from a thermal perspective.
Now, there are power limiters to the SSD. As I mentioned, I'm looking at this from more of a thermal problem at this point. From a connector perspective, you know, our connectors that we use for at least the EDSOF family of SSDs are 79 watts.
The max power, which you know, when we came up with a spec nine years ago, that seemed like plenty. And you know, greater than that, there's connector modifications needed, but we can figure out those modifications and likely keep, and things should be able to keep backwards compatible.
Around that. So, from the form factor, there's many dependencies. You know, it largely comes down to maintaining the enclosure temp. Right. And there's two different ways you do that. And because the enclosure temp, you're trying to touch all your hot components out there such that they can have some sort of method.
To be able to dissipate that heat off of it. And the two basic methods are convection and conduction, right? Air cooling is convection, and that is much less efficient than a conductive cooling surface, like a, for example, like a cold plate. And for this reason, direct liquid cooling is starting to appear.
We've actually started work on this. Actually, we published a spec back late last year on one of the form factors, the UN.s form factor, where we define this cold plate area, or what we call a cooling interface area. And it's a contact point for the cold plate and other cooling components.
So now instead of having air being able to cool all my hottest components or cool the enclosure to be, which is cooling all my hottest components, now I've got a more direct tap to something that is trying to keep, trying to regulate.
That temperature better. And we also have a spec that's currently a draft right now, but we are going down the same avenue with that. And a lot of these paths are focused on single-sided cooling at this point.
Now, you know, as far as cooling coverage, it's ultimately dependent on the SSD dimensions, flow rate. You know, all this is engineering. There's a bunch of things that, you know, a bunch of variables that we need to go kind of go figure out, and some of them we try to fix as best as we can.
So, this is my opinion of kind of how I'm seeing things flush out. But right now, air mostly should be able to cool up through PCI 6, maybe challenge the support PCIe 7 and beyond, based off of where I'm seeing some of the powers lie.
That doesn't mean you can't cool devices with P, you know, running at PCI 6. You know, anything better is just better, right? But an SSD with one large contact surface to a cold plate will probably cool through PCI 7.
But it may be challenged to go beyond that. And the reason behind that is that if you think about that 50%, and again, power may come down a bit, but if you think power is going to keep increasing, you start getting into this yellow and red area where, you know, how are you going to get all that heat off?
Of it because you do have components on both sides of the SSD. And so it's hard to kind of leech all that heat to one side. So, this is where, as an industry, do we need to start looking beyond the one large contact surface to maybe two contact surfaces on opposite sides?
Sides. And by the way, to answer a question, all thicknesses of E1S do not support cold plate cooling. What we've been focused on as an industry is one SKU or one version of the device.
Um, per spec. So, for instance, E3.s and E3.l are focused on one thickness, E1.s is focused on one thickness. For E1.s, it's the 9.5 millimeter. For E3S and E3L, it's the 7.5 millimeter.
Okay, so then to touch on the last part, a lot of cold data needs to be warmer. As the capacity goes higher, bandwidths per terabyte needs to stay the same. You know, this is where we're seeing some movement towards SSDs to kind of handle some of these workloads. You know, there's been some names, I've seen some names.
Throughout industry, I've heard nearline SSD thrown around, so I'm using it here. This touches back on something we were also looking at earlier, which is: you know, kill C NAND scaling continues to lower costs, you know, as you try to maintain that performance.
Performance per terabyte, it gets more and more difficult. You know, llc performance is lower than TLC, but better than HDDs. And we're hearing targets throughout industry. And this gets into some of the nearline SSD where the aspects.
Of it are focused on minimizing the costs. And a lot of this is dealing with how much performance do I need to maintain some of these AI needs. So if we increase the nominal capacity of the SSD, we'd reduce the overall RAC cost.
This lowers the overall cost of the system. And increasing this nominal capacity means more NANDIS. We've done some studies. My personal opinion is E2 is the most cost-effective path to get there.
Obviously, there's other opinions out in industry, so this is just mine. But yeah. And kind of a summary on this, you know, on that section is basically: you know, AI SSDs expect to consume more power to meet the higher performance needs. You know, we're going to need to start going down the drive.
Direct liquid cooling path on more and more of these as we go forward. Where the nearline SSDs will maintain a good balance of capacity versus performance versus cost, and you're going to need a higher capacity SSD in order to lower those overall system costs.
Costs, you know, capacity is going to go up. So, how do you do that? You know, and this is where we look at how many dies you can put on a device. So, with that, oh, one last thing. So, a lot of this data came out of the SFF. Tom and I are both members, actually, both of us are chairs.
Of it, so or within that group. If you're interested in more of that from a technical aspect, let us know, join the group. We have lots of fun. Thanks, Anthony and Tom. That was great. We have a number of questions.
Questions that have been sort of queuing up as you guys were speaking. Is there any of them that I know you guys can see them as well? Are there any that you think you could handle in about two minutes? I can touch a couple of them really quick. So, as far as the mechanical and costly increases for replacing the backplane with connector.
I would actually argue that you're going from a backplane to a midplane because you have to have a fixed point on that connector. You would have a lot of that same circuitry on that mid plane. So, and that mid plane would actually have a lower cost overall. So, you're reducing, I would say, you were reducing the cost of the.
The from the going from a back plane to a midplane. Um, I think that answers that question. So, um, uh, NyQuest frequency for PCIe is expected to be 64 gigahertz. Does it assume PCIe8 continues to use PAM4? Um, the
Expectation right now for PCIe 8 is that it would continue to use PAM4. On the so I think I answered that. And on HBF, I'm not going to comment on that. You know, as we showed what Tom and I were.
We're showing earlier, you know, there are enablers to get SSDs to run at PCIe 8 and beyond. So, you know, it's a matter of how you want to go about doing that. Excellent. All right. Well, thanks for that. Anybody's questions that we didn't answer live today?
Today, as well as the questions that we did answer live today, we'll put them all into the QA blog post and post that, like we said, probably within about two weeks. So, thank you very much again for attending this webinar. We would love for you to rate it and provide us with your feedback so we know what we're doing good and what we're not doing so good, and we can address that and make.
Better. This webinar and a copy of the slides are available at our educational library. And again, we'll post that QA blog soon. And then please follow us on LinkedIn and X. Again, we greatly appreciate your time. Have a great day.
