Vertical Optimization of the CXL Stack Webinar

Good afternoon and good morning to everyone. Thank you for attending the CXL Consortium Vertical Optimization of the CXL Stack webinar. Today's webinar is presented by the Samsung Memory Division, and I will be handing it off to the team to begin the webinar.
Hello, everyone. Thank you for joining this webinar. It's my pleasure to be here. I'm Jin Inse, Senior Director and System Architect, Head of the Memory Architecture Group at Samsung. I currently lead our CXL product development and technical research. It is a great
Honor to recognize Samsung at the CXR Consortium and introduce the three of our key CXL technologies designed specifically for the AI application.
Okay, first page. As we move toward agentic and physical AI, the demand for memory is exploding. This is largely driven by multimodal inputs. According to our recent experiment at Samsung, processing video requires eight times more KB cache than processing.
simple text as like the lab chart. To give you a concrete example, look at lobotics. If you want a lobot to function for just 15 minutes with 10 actions per second, you need about 1.2 terabytes of memory just for the KB cache.
Furthermore, this data needs to be maintained as a form of long-term memory for the future reuse. In today's industry, CXM memory has emerged as the most realistic solution to meet this massive memory demand. We are already collaborating.
Trading with many customers to build actual use cases. One of the most frequent requests we receive is to manage KBCache with higher performance and low TCU than existing RDMA-based sharing systems. Customers also want to use the pooling technology to
Services for the different AI agents and maximize memory efficiency. To meet these needs, we have optimized the CXL memory system across three dimensions: latency, bandwidth, and capacity. This optimization
Spans both hardware and software. Today, I want to walk you through the three technologies that make this possible. The first technology focuses on latency. We all know that CXL naturally has a little bit higher latency compared to the traditional theme.
I mean, the local memory to the CPU. To bridge this gap, Samsung developed SCHMU, the CXL hub page monitoring unit. SSCHMU is designed to compensate for that inherent CXL latency at the system level by device page migration.
Support. By implementing this, we managed to improve the latency perceived at the application level by 40%. This effectively allows applications to experience performance that is nearly similar with the standard themes, removing the primary barrier to.
CXL adoption. The second challenge is bandwidth. In many cases, the PCI bandwidth used by the CXL is lower than the native DLM bandwidth. We address this bottleneck with the CXL PNM, the process near memory technology. CXL PNM utilizes the data reduction techniques to overcome the features.
Limits of the interface. Instead of moving load data back and forth, we process and reduce it near the memory. This approach has allowed us to deliver five times more bandwidth increase in effective bandwidth for the application. It ensures that the
The data flow stays fast enough to keep up with high-performance AI workload. Finally, we have the issue of stranded memory, which is a significant pain point in modern data centers. To solve this, we are introducing Pangier version 2, a Kubernetes-based memory orchestration solution.
HangerBotton 2 manages memory resources dynamically. It minimizes wasted idle memory across the cluster and reallocates it where it's needed most. By using this orchestration layer, we have improved the effective memory capacity by approximately.
50%. This allows the data centers to do much more work with the hardware they already have. Okay, that was my introduction for today's webinar. So, from now on, we will explain the details for each technology.
Hello, this is Wanjie Lee from Samsung Electronics, and I am responsible for the host-side software of the CFCL-tiered memory system. Today, I will talk about hub-page monitoring, which is a critical.
Issue in CXL-based system. I will first explain the limitation of host-based approaches and then introduce a device-based approach to address them, namely CHMU, which has been incorporated with the CXL specification.
I will also present the practical implementation and evaluation result. So, why hot page monitoring matters? As you all know, CXM memory inherently has higher latency than DRAM. This is mainly due to the PCIe.
Bandwidth interconnect and protocol overhead. In practice, when a CXL switch is introduced, the latency to CXL memory devices becomes even higher. As a result, if memory is used without careful consideration,
It naturally leads to performance degradation at both the applications and system levels. The fundamental idea of mitigating this is straightforward. Frequently assessed data should reside in DRAM, while less frequently
Used data should be placed in CSL memory. In other words, hot pages should be placed in higher-tier memory and cold pages in lower-tier memory. This naturally improves application performance. However, this introduces
Key questions. How do we accurately determine which pages are hot? Traditionally, host-based techniques such as Autonuma and Daemon in the Linux memory management subsystem has been used for this purpose.
However, these approaches require continuous CPU involvement, which introduces software over and limits performance. Then, what if this task is offloaded to the device? In the case, we can reduce host resource usage and potentially improve.
Improve accuracy. So let's take a closer look at the limitation of existing host-based approaches. There are two main issues: CPU overhead and accuracy. For example, NUMA balancing works by modifying the state of selection.
PTEs to intentionally trigger page faults. This mechanism, commonly known as NUMA hint faults, introduces significant overhead on the CPU side. Since these faults are used to make page migration decisions, they in
Inevitably consume a considerable amount of CPU cycles. And PTE scanning approaches have similar limitations. They require scanning all PTEs in their target lesion, which is costly, and they rally only.
On the single access bit, which limits the granularity of the information. In other words, the access bit only indicates whether a page was recently accessed, but it does not capture access frequency or temporal patterns. So, as a result,
The accuracy is inherently limited. Daemon, for example, reduces overhead by using a sampling-based approach instead of full PTE scanning, but this comes at the cost of reduced accuracy. And similarly,
Sampling-based techniques such as PBS cannot fully capture all memory accesses, and increasing the sampling rate can improve accuracy, but it also increases the number of profiling events, leading to higher CP overhead. In summary, host
Device-based approaches have a structural limitation. They incur high cost, yet provide limited information. To address these limitations, device-based monitoring has been introduced. The key idea is simple.
Hot pages directly at the device where memory accesses actually occur. This approach reduces CPU involvement and enables more accurate observation of access patterns since the device can monitor memory transactions at a fine.
Granularity, and this is the motivation behind CHMU, the CXL hot page monitoring unit. With CHMU, the host continues to manage page temperature using traditional policies such as LIU, while the
A device provides additional harness information for CXM memory. This enables the intended behavior of tiered memory systems, demoting code pages from DRAM, and promoting hot pages from CXM memory. An important
Point is that this is not just a research idea. Industry requirements were first discussed within the OCP community and then standardized through the CXL consortium. Therefore, CHMU is expected to play a key role.
Load in future tiered memory systems. As defined in specification, CHMU collects hot page information at the device level and provides interfaces for the host to read this data along with event and threshold-based
Mechanisms. The effectiveness of CHMU was validated in our previous work, and the results were published in IEEE Transactions on Computers under the title SIRI. I will spend
This is in more detail in the next slide. Implementing per-page access counting in hardware is not trivial. A straightforward approach is to maintain a dedicated counter for each page.
However, this quickly becomes impractical as memory capacity increases. For example, with 128 gigabytes of memory, more than 30 million pages need to be tracked. Storing counters for all of them would require.
tens of megabytes of memory, which is a significant overhead for the device. To address this, we changed our approach. Instead of tracking everything exactly, we adopted the probabilistic estimation method.
After evaluating several probabilistic data structures, we found that count mean sketch provides the best trade-off between accuracy and hardware cost. Counter-mean sketch is well-known probabilistic.
Data structure for estimating frequency in streaming data. While I will skip the detailed mechanics, it uses a limited size of counter table and still achieves high precision with relatively low error as shown in this figure.
Although CMS introduces some estimation error, it is sufficiently accurate for identifying hot pages. And returning to our system, let me go to the previous page. We implemented this hardware on.
On FPGA and extended the vanilla CL device driver to support CHMU standard and deployed a corner daemon that migrates hot pages to local DRAM. Our observation shows that even a simple policy.
Can significantly improve performance across multiple applications. And finally, let's briefly look at the impact of CHMU. In conclusion, the performance improvement is.
Of censure. You observe up to approximately three times speed up compared to the baseline first touch policy, and it also outperformed autonoma. The reason is that hot pages are gradually migrated.
To DRAM, reducing accesses to slower CSM memory. As a result, DRAM bandwidth utilization increases, and overall application execution time decreases. This is not only due to latency reduction, but also because reduced
CXL traffic alleviates borderlux. In LIRA workload, we observed that hot pages progressively move to DRAM over time and performance improves accordingly. In summary, CHMU is not just a
Conceptual idea, but practical solution that delivers meaningful performance gains in their systems and applications. So, to conclude, device-based hot-page monitoring is essential to overcome the limitation of host-based approaches and
CHMU provides a practical and standardized solution for this solution, for this problem. Thank you. Hello, everyone. My name is Hojin Nam, and I'm from Amazon Electronics, and I'm participating in developing CXL and PNM for software.
So, today I will talk about CXL PNM processing your memory. And this is a technology we are developing to overcome bandwidth constraints in AI workload. So, I will start by explaining the bandwidth bottleneck problem in CXL systems, then show
How CFL PNM addresses it, and finally present a proof of concept demonstration with real research. So, CFSL memory pooling is a powerful technology. It allows us to connect many memory devices.
Through a switch. And as we add more devices, the aggregated memory bandwidth also increases. So, this is one of the key strengths of CXL systems. Let me explain with the example on this slide. So, we have two upstream.
Ports and each providing 64 gigabyte per second bandwidth. And we have six sexual devices and each providing 32 gigabyte per second bandwidth. So each upstream port is connected to three devices. So the aggregate bandwidth from three devices is
3 times 32, that is 96 gigabyte per second bandwidth. But the upstream port can only deliver 64 gigabytes. This means 32 gigabytes of bandwidth is lost. It simply cannot pass through. And as we add more devices,
This gap becomes even larger. For memory AI workload, memory intensive AI workloads, this bottleneck is a critical problem. So instead of trying to increase the upstream bandwidth, we focus on improving how the bandwidth is.
Use. The way we do this is by reducing the amount of data that needs to travel over the sexual link in the first place. So the key idea of sexual PNM is to reduce the amount of data.
Data transfer of all the sexual links. Let me explain why this is important using vector search as an example. So, in vector search, we compare a query vector against a large number of stored vectors. This means that for each query, we need to access all.
Large amount of data from memory. In a conventional CPU-based system, all of these vectors must be transferred from memory to the CPU. So for each query, vectors are fetched from memory and transferred to the CPU and then processed.
In this process, the amount of computation per data element is relatively small, but the amount of data movement is very, very large. So, the system becomes memory-bound rather than compute-bound. In a CXO system, this data movement also.
Goes through the sex cell link. With sex cell PNM, we change where computation happens. Instead of moving large amounts of data from sex cell device to the CPU, we move the computation closer to where the data resides inside the sexl device.
So, the data flows change like this: before large data moves from memory to the CPU for computation. After the device processes the data locally by transfer command, and only the reduced result is returned. So, the amount of data transfer per operation.
Is significantly reduced. So, now let me show how this reduction in data movement improves the overall system. In this diagram, some of the sexual memory devices have been replaced with sexual pattern devices.
Each sets of PNM devices integrate large capacity memory, high internal bandwidth, and integrate integrated processing cores. Because each PNM device processes data locally, only reduced users need to pass through the off-stream port. This means the system.
Can process more operations within the same bandwidth constraint. We are not increasing bandwidth, we are using it more effectively, and this approach enables scalable performance even with a fixed sexual bandwidth. So,
Let me now introduce a concrete use case, vector search in REG system. REG is widely used in modern AI applications. It retrieves relevant information from a large database before generating an answer. So
Vector search is the core operation in REC. It compares a query against the large number of stored vectors to find the closest matches. This is a highly memory-intensive workload. We implemented this using the files.
A widely used open source library for vector search. In FISE, search goes through two stages. The first, core search, it identifies candidate clusters and it is relatively lightweight. Second, find search, compares the current.
Against many vectors, and it is very memory-intensive workload. So, in our approach, the core search stays on the CPU as usual. The fine search, the most memory-intensive part, is uploaded to the CSSL PNM device. So, on this
Slide, you can see the code comparison. So, the left side is the original file code, and the right side shows our modified version. So, we added just a few lines to redirect the file search to the PNM device using our API.
In summary, first the vector index is generated from the data set. Then the index is loaded into the CXL PNM device. And after that, at current time, the CPU handles core search and the CXL PNM handles fine search. Let me now tell what
Through our proof of concept demonstration. So, the server uses CSL2.0 capable CPU with 40 cores. And we connected four self-PNM devices to the host, and each with 32 gigabytes of memory and interface through a PCI eGen5 by A. For the workload,
We used files with index IVA flat, and which assumed that all vector DV data resides in sexual memory. So we compared two cases: CPU-only execution versus sexual PNM. CPU only achieved 3.5%.
Corrects per second. And with CESL PNM, we achieve 19.7 corrects per second. And that is more than five times the current throughput. As you can see on the monitoring graph, when using CESL PNM, the PNM engines take over the
Computation, and we can confirm that the whole CPU utilization is significantly reduced. So, this frees the CPU for other tasks. By reducing data movement and leveraging near-memory computation, we achieve significant performance improvement in a real AI work.
So let me summarize what we have covered today. So Sexel enables scalable memory systems with high aggregate memory bandwidth. However, Sexl switch systems have a fundamental bottleneck at the off-stream port.
So by combining CSL with PNM, we reduce data movement and improve how bandwidth is used. This allows the system to perform more work under the same bandwidth constraint. The work I presented today is at the research stage, and we are looking forward.
Exploring extending this approach to KV cache upload to sexual memory and supporting additional vector search format beyond IVA flat in RAS system. So, this is one possible direction for improving efficiency in future GXL-based systems. Thank you very much for your talk.
Hello, good afternoon, and good morning, everyone. Thanks for joining this webinar. My name is Andre B, principal engineer in the memory architecture group at Samsung. In this part, I will introduce the CXL2.0-based memory pulling.
Solution namely Pangea V2, a dynamic lag-scale disaggregated memory system integrated into the cloud-native Kubernetes environment. Specifically, I will show you how the open source of the Pangio V2 software stack systemically.
Eradicate critical technical void within the ecosystem. Furthermore, I will present the economic imperatives for enterprise data centers and the company-wide usage and the tangible application effect.
Although the advent of the CXL2 and the latest 3.2 specification successfully established the foundational hardware blueprint for multiple first memory pooling.
And the sharing biodynamic capacity devices. The software ecosystem required to dynamically allocate the control D's advanced hardware resource for real world data center workload remain in an incomplete trajectory.
During the CXL for that zero technical training event, Anil, the chair of the CXL Consortium Marketing Working Group, articulated the indispensable key element necessary for successful construction of the memory pooling ecosystem.
In his presentation titled The Challenges for Main Pooling Ecosystem. According to his comprehensive address, formulating a flow is CXL ecosystem demands a synergy of the CXL-supported host CPU.
From the internet AMD, high-performance CXL fabric switch chip from entitle like Marvel or Panacea, the global fabric attached memory devices manufactured by Samsung and the microphone, fabric control software memory.
Middleware and crucially, the high-tier orchestration software governing these vast resources. While hardware device and firmware-level technology are advancing at the breakneck pace, the objects of this top-tier orchestration rate.
Which serves as the vital conditions between end-user application and the underlying hardware, act as a contributor impeding the commercialization of the CXL technology.
Panger represents a comprehensive integrated hardware software architecture that combines the AG-based CXL switch with the CXL memory to dynamically provision pulled memory within the existing Kubernetes ecosystem, entirely circumventing the need.
For application code alterations or operating system disruption. PENDER is the PLC project name, and each version of the PENGER system follows the corresponding version of this Excel specification. The most innovative PLC is the same.
Feature of the CXL to the zero-based Pangerv2 architecture is each support the single runtime dynamic capacity adjustment. Traditional virtualization as a container platform requires a memory to statically allocate it at the time of
The instance creation, a practice that directly contributed to 23% of average utilized lay observed in the major cloud cluster. And if we allow the physical binding and the unbinding of the section memory.
Devices to work node in real time, thereby bridging the gap between resource demand and provisioning. The fundamental software architecture underpinning in this system is the distinctly bifurcated into lower layer, the CXL agent.
Tasked with the physical infrastructure management and the upper layer, the data center memory fabric management with responsible for logical memory provisioning within Kubernetes cluster.
The CXL family infrastructure within the data center will inherit features highly complex topology composed of switches and devices from various vendors. The pandemic with CXL agent is robustly engineered of one
Fabric Open Fabric Management Framework recognized as the Sunfish framework established by Open Fabric Alliance to effectively abstract this heterogeneous complexity. The function of this agent involved the transfer.
The unique command line interface or profitarial favorite manager API inherent to individual bandwidth vendor switches into standard DMTF LED fish LASPL API format in real time. Subsequently, the serving
These to the over arcing memory orchestrator. From a perspective of the technologically advancement, the legacy specification were limited in their capacity to fully represent in.
In dispensable CXL2.0 feature, the CXL agent in Pangibi2 ingeniously introduced the virtual CXL switches and the virtual PCI2 PCI object into the Redfish data model tree.
Successfully proposing and integrating them as the global standard specification. Positioned directly above the CXL agent is the GCMFM manager, a memory compatibility layer that's stringent.
Implemented the OCP composable memory system architectural specification. DCM weapon manager facilitated the stable execution of the memory-intensive application path on the worker node within Kubernetes cluster, negating the requirement.
To procure expensive specialized bare metal nodes equipped with massive memory. This MFM achieved a granular result managed by dividing CXL device into membranes, unit of
128 megabytes or 2 gigabytes that aligned with the Linux kernel hub plugin management. This enables a single physical device to be shared across the multiple load. Furthermore, this MFM manager supports the
Interleave the location policy across the multiple devices, which maximize all the memory bandwidth. The value of a pangoid to software stack lies in its ability to empower end users to provide.
means a pattern spec completely eliminating the need to modify complex application code or custom script performing this crucial
Link role to ensure such a transparent reusability is the CXL node resource interface plugin, which interfaces directly with the container runtime interface such as container D or CRIO.
The CXL NLI plugin intervin, the container-like cycle, to adjust the resource in real time without modifying the underlying operating system or Kubernetes binary. The workflow for dynamic memory allocation in
Proceeds as follows: A data set operator requests the creation of the new part via Kubernetes API. Using standard
Command like Kuberctl apply with part YAML file. Concurrently, the resource annotation field with the party YAML file specification is explicitly declared. So attribute memory type. CXL alongside
Provide the required memory capacity for execution. Upon the workload, the CRI runtime detecting the sandbox environment creation event for new part, the wrong part sandbox fool internal to the
CXM NLI plugin is instantly triggered. Interveneing the via this hoop, the NLI plugin formally requests the location of the specified memory capacity from the CXM pool by invoking RESTful API directly.
At the worker node DCMFM agent. The DCMFM manager receiving the request for optimal command CMMD device according to the pre-configured policy. Subsequently, it
The CXL agent to particular bind the logical region of the selected device to the work node PCS. Following the successful bind, the DCMFM agent changed the two gigabyte offline memory block into online state.
which is registered in the Linux system then topology, transitioning them into actual available memory. Upon completion of workload processing and the part termination, the stop part sandbox
Is generated. The DCMFM monitor aggregated this termination event globally across the cluster, revert the memory blocks occupied by container back to the offline state, and execute a switch port on binding process.
Via the CXL agent. Safely returned the resource to the main memory pool. Due to the fundamental disparities in the data transmission mechanisms, the CXL 2.0-based Pangea-which architecture is
Deliver revolutionary performance enhancement and the TCO reduction effect compared to legacy infrastructure reliant on RDMA. To emulate the application environment, frequently operating.
With the actual enterprise data center, we used YCS workload was executed, targeting when cached and lattice in memory database. The result proved the CXL-based memory poolings.
Across the whole metrics. From the perspective of the enterprise data center and the OEN customer, the existing tangible financial tissue reduction impact in line in the capability to maximize Kubernetes product.
Within the single server. For instance, when deploying heavy transl database path consuming 10 gigabytes of memory on the physical load equipped with the strictly limited local DRAM memory of both.
30 gigabyte. Traditional system hit the physical world. Completely seeding system expansion at the exactly three-part deployment. However, by applying the pango to software stack, even if the node is local memory.
Adjusted. The necessary memory is supplied in real time on demand from the CSM memory pool. Consequently, six or more parts can be operated stably with a single server without any interruptions.
Although examining the an individual isolated part may be developed or minor performance degrees approximately 10 14 14 percent due to the CXL remote access communication.
Dentally packing and concurrently operating a great number of the parts with a single physical server proved the penominal scale out effect, elevating the total system throughput by up to five times compared to the running on single part.
Okay, finally, as a part of our hope, contribute to accelerating the arrival of the next generation memory center computing error through the open innovation ecosystem driven by CXL to the zero-based Pango2.
We look forward to seeing you again. CXL3.0-based solution. Thank you. Thank you, everyone, for joining the CXL Consortium webinar. And thank you to the Samsung Memory Division team for sharing.
Their expertise. If you did have any questions, you can share that in the QA chat box and we will address those questions in our future blog. So please follow the CXL Consortium on LinkedIn for updates. The presentation recording will be available on the CXL Consortium.
YouTube channels and the slides will also be available on the CXL website. Once again, thank you for attending this vertical optimization of the CXL stack webinar. And I hope you have a great afternoon.