Dynamic GPU Provisioning in Kubernetes With Composable Disaggregated Infrastructure

In this present presentation we introduced how to dynamic provision GPU to vice versa by using new data structure called transactive disability inside structure. We aim to achieve efficient utilization of GTU By major problems, these connected signals, depending on what one goals. I'm Jim Haste from T2. I manager of the software development team for SOS and Viness. And frankly, I'm working on the social sector and related to other. So we can get new social functions. Hi, everyone. I wanted to speak. Thank you for being here. My name is Alberta Nag. I'm working at the Danube Series and the topical engineering. In this extent, I would like to put anything about And then let me so first idea explain the draft form equal in their data. Users could possibly large amounts of computational. Gemand platforms that balance high performance and power efficiency. The reason is that the exposed growth rate and workloads have led to a lower increase in demand for GPUs. While at the same time, the increasing power consumption caused by

Computer facial resources has become a societal problem. To meet both demands, platforms that balance high performance and power efficiency are essential. Currently, various solutions to exist work are under consideration. For example, the software that efficiently Hardware, web GPU and digital query, and work decentering concepts such as IO and what to be installed. And one solution to these challenges is an architecture called composable disaggregate infrastructure. We refer to this architecture as CD. In the following slides. And first, I will explain the concept of CDI. CDI is a new sub-architecture that allows configuration of server components freely based on users' requirements on demand. So see the below left diagram. This left diagram works represents conventional servers. This means each server component, such as CPU, memory, GPU, and network card are directly installed into servers. And in CDI, these server components are disaggregated. and connect them to PCIe or CXL switches. And we can create resource pool. And then user can create custom-made barometer servers by composing resources in resource pool. And we call this compose parameter.

And user can create composite biometer with any hardware configuration by software definition. This is CEDA concept. Next, I will explain the software stack in CEDA system. The CDA system includes management software that allows users to create composite biometer with any desired. configuration. This is the CDM manager located at the center of this diagram. The CDM manager controls PCI or CX switches to logically connect arbitrary resources such as GPUs to any servers, thereby creating a composite parameter. And uh user can create uh composed biometer by utilizing the CDA API, barrier CRI or DUI. And then user can freely install any operating system, Kubernetes clusters or other components on the created composer biometer. Next, we want to elaborate resource pool in CDI to dynamically scale the number of GPUs connected to Kubernetes nodes based on the port route. This aims to efficiently utilize GPUs within resource pool, achieving Both high performance and power efficiency. For example, when the number of ports increases on the Kubernetes cluster and GP resources become insufficient, in this case, GPS are automatically added from resource pool to the Kubernetes cluster node.

Conversally, if the number of ports decreases and the unused GPUs exist, in this case, those GPUs are automatically disconnected from the nodes and return it to the resource pool. So by dynamically adjusting the number of GPUs based on port workload, In in this manner, we achieve both high performance and power efficiency. Next slide. Yeah. Regarding what we uh want to achieve, let's clarify what current components can do and uh cannot do. First, what connect Kubernetes can do is dynamically utilize hardware resources like GPUs from pods. This is a standard Kubernetes feature called dynamic resource allocation. We call this feature DRA for short. feature can recognize and use GPUs already attached to nodes. Next, I explain what Kubernetes cannot do. Kubernetes cannot recognize GPUs in a resource pool. Therefore, Kubernetes cannot know whether attachable GPUs exist. Furthermore, Even if Kubernetes could recognize the existence of attachable GPUs, it schedules port onto nodes before those GPUs are attached to the node, leading to errors. In other words, Kubernetes cluster can use GPUs already attached to the node, but uh it

cannot recognize GPUs in the resource pool. These are issues related to use of GPUs. Therefore, they are related to the DRA function. So I will explain DRA in more detail in the next slide. Array is a standard commercial feature that allows both to use hardware resources such as GPUs. From the user's perspective, the following two data are important. The first one is resource-size. Exhale slice is available device list for each node. And DRA has a component called DREKubert plugin. This component is uh running on each node and create resource rice corresponding on each node. For example, Node 1 has 1A100 GPU and Node 2 has 1 H100 GPU. In this case, this Kubernetes plugin creates this resource slides, which shows Node 1 has 1A100 and this Kubernetes plugin. Creates this resource size, which shows Node 2 as 1H100. And the next important data is resource claim. Resource claim is requested device list such as GPU model name and quantity. Resource claim is

Is created by user demand. This diagram shows sorry source cream is created by user demand, and this diagram shows the user want. To assign one H100 to the port. And then, Kubernetes scheduler compares these two types of resources to determine which GPU to allocate the port. In this diagram, it can be seen that in order to has a required GPU, the H100. Therefore, common schedule rascales the port to number two. Finally, the Kubernetes plugin setting this H100 so that this port can use this H100 GPU. Is an overview of DRA feature. Next, I will explain in detail the two problems that current components cannot do. The first issue is that components can only use GPUs that are already connected to Node. In this diagnostic diagram. The qubit plugin can obtain information about GPUs connected to the node and create a list of available devices per node. However, there is no function to obtain information about GPU lists in the resource pool and create a list of them.

Therefore, a new function is needed for using GPUs in resource pool. Regarding the second issue, even if Kubernetes can recognize GPUs in the resource pool, Kubernetes will try to use the unattached GPUs and will cause an error. In this diagram, we assume that uh Kubernetes can recognize GPUs in resource pool. In this case, Kubernetes scheduler can allocate GPU in resource pool to a port. However, uh Kubernetes scheduler immediately schedules the port uh to a node. Regardless, GPU is attached or not. As a result, port is trying to use the GPU does not exist in this node, and an error occurs. To solve this potential, Problems, we have two challenges. First challenge is providing a new function to your GPUs in resource pool. And we have solved this by developing a new OSS called Codi and implemented the above function. And second challenge is providing a mechanism to make when scheduled wait until GPS has attached to Node. We solve this by implementing shader functionality into Kubernetes Scheduler. So I will go into more detail on this in the following slides. Next, I will explain about Codi project.

CODI is an OSS project providing a standard way to use resources in source pushable from a Kubernetes cluster. It provides the ability to dynamically attach audio devices such as GPUs to Kubernetes nodes based on port workloads. And the CODI first version has been released. On October 9th, 2025. And we are aiming to register Kodi as a CNCF Sandbox project. Additionally, the Kodi project involves merge product development and user companies. So we are extremely grateful to those companies for their cooperation. Next, I will explain the design of Codi. The most important prerequisite is that we need to comply with the existing DL concept and framework because if we break the existing DRA framework, it will have a big impact for users and developers. So we came up with the following concept based on the DRA framework. To expose the device listing source port to Kubernetes, we use a resource-like data structure. In this diagram, it is green block. And regarding retro block, this is existing resource slices, which represents a list of devices connected to the node. And another important point is that these device lists need to be applied.

Predate it as devices are attached and detached. For example, when we attach a device to a node from a source pool, in this case, the device data moves from the green block to the red block. And conversely, when we detach a device from a node, In this case, the bias data moves from the red block to green block. In this way, we incorporate the functionality into Kubernetes. And then to dynamically increase or decrease the number of GPUs, Following concepts are required. The blue blocks in this diagram represent new components. The first one is the function to determine the necessity of decreasing the number of devices. And the second one is a function to instruct actual attachment and detachment. To code the manage from Kubernetes. And the third one is a function to reflect device listing source pool to Kubernetes. And this function creates and updates device listing source pool as resource-like data format. And we also need to improve Kubernetes scheduler. This is necessary to wait for devices to attach before scheduling pods. In the next slide, I will explain the orbital architecture uh that combines these components. This diagram shows the orbital functional blocks.

And processing flow as a big picture. At first, we developed three components for Codi project. First one is composable DIR driver. This component creates available device lists in resource Per as a resource-less data format. Second one is dynamic device scalar. This component determines the necessity of attaching or detaching based on the port work route using GPU. Third one is composable source operator. This component requests Code Manager to attach or detach based on the determined. Mentioned by Dynamic Debascular. And we also incorporated shader functionality into the command scheduler so that the ratio scheduler can wait for proto scheduling until GPU is attached if that GPU is within source pool. Next, I will explain the processing flow for attaching. Dynamic GPU provisioning using these components. First, the L function creates a list of available GPUs. This block. So at first, DL qubit plugin creates a list of GPUs connected to nodes and composer DL driver creates a list of GPUs in resource pool by asking code manager after that user creates a port that request requires

As a GPU. And then, Kubernetes scheduler tries to find available GPU in the GPU list and allocate it to the port. If the allocated GPU is from the resource pool, Kubernetes scheduler will Not immediately scheduled the port to the node, but will wait until the GPU is attached. And then the dynamic debus clearer detects the waiting state and determines that the GPU needs to be attached. In this case, dynamic debased error. Updates data that manage node device configuration called composability requests. Detail of this data structure will be explained in a letter slide. And then composable source operator detects changes to the device configuration described in the composability request. And request the code manager to attach the tiny GPU. And Code Manager then attaches the GPU to the tiny node. Once the GPU Has been attached. Kubernetes scheduler still the port to the nodes. Finally, the DLCubert plugin configures attached GPU so that the port can use it. And the port begin is running. This concludes

The over-processing flow. In the next slide, Otanam-san will explain the detail of each component. From here, I would like to introduce the detail of each COLI component that we developed. To enable dynamic GPU provisioning. First one is composable DLA driver. This component is the pert shown within the let out line in the overall architecture diagram. What kind of component is it? This component shows GPU in the Lesource Pooh to Kubernetes. What is it doing? Compatible DL driver creates a list of available GPUs in Lisos Pool as Lesource Slice. Resource Slice is a list of devices available. Available to a pod. And this component periodically calls the code in manager to update the device list to make it up to date. The number of devices in ListOS Plu could be changing because they are used by other nodes. I will explain how a composable DLA driver interacts with existing DLA. Codi works with existing DLA in two ways. In the case of GPU attachment, GPU is moved from resource pool list to

The node GPU list when attaching a GPU from resource pool to a node. In the case of GPU detach, GPU is moved from node GPU list to the resource pool list after detaching the GPU from the node. Next is the composable resource operator. This component is the part shown within the LED outline in the overall architecture diagram. From now on, we will call this CRO. What kind of component is it? This component has a Feature to attach or detach actual devices. What it's doing? Share monitors a definition file. This represents a composability request as shown in the YAML file below. Composability request describes the number of devices. For each node, including model name. Please look at the YAML, and we have highlighted the fields that require attention with dotted lines. Model field indicates which model of GPU is connected to the node. Side field indicates how many GPUs. GPUs are connected. Target node field indicates which node the GPU should be attached to. And the second row of shell row, it requests coding manager to attach or detach actual devices according to the device configuration.

Specified in composability request. This section outlines a point we have to consider. We must ensure that hot plugging of devices is performed safely. For example, when hot removing a GPS, We must ensure that it is not in use by any other pods before physically disconnecting it. To solve this, we designed the following flow to ensure that the order of steps 1, 2, and 3 is always achieved. Detachment step 1. CLO prohibits any pods from using the device. Detachment step 2. CRO executes the hot removal operation on the operating system. Detachment step 3. CLO instructs coding manager to detach the device. That is the detachment for In the attachment flow, we do the opposite operation. The third one is dynamic device scaler. From now on, we'll call this DDS. This component is the purge shown within the let out run in the overall activity. Diagram. What kind of component is it? DDS determines the necessity of attaching or detaching based on the rod or pod using GPU. What is it doing? DDS increases and decreases the side field in the composability request.

And our key design concept is to ensure stateless. DDS runs a periodic loop and computes the optimal number of GPUs for each node based on whether GPU is used or not. The following diagram is explained. In the attachment and detachment decision logic. The attachment per consists of three steps. First step is to check the number of GPUs requested by POTS. Second step is to check whether the resource pool contains Requested number of GPUs. Third step is to increase the number of sites filled in the composability request. As a result, the process of GPU attachment proceeds. Next, the print of detachment consists of two steps. First, is to check the number of unused GPUs and its idle duration. Second step is to decrease the number of the side field and the composability requests. As a result, the process of GPU detachment proceeds. Next, let me explain points we have to consider. When considering the intelligence for device scaling, there are many factors that need to be taken into account. Here is an example of factors: data inconsistency. The device list and little slides.

Can temporarily show a different GPU count than the lithospo because of reflection delay. The middle figure shows the concept of the reflection delay. The left side represents the lithospo, and the right side represents the lithospher. As shown in this example, due to the time lock before the resource pool state is reflected in the Kubernetes layer, it can happen that the resource slice lists at GPU, even though there is actually no GPU in the resource pool. To solve this, DDS is designed to be stageless and calculate the optimal device configuration for each loop. Therefore, even if these inconsistencies occur, they are addressed by immediately correcting them in the next loop. Finally, I introduce the functionality we enhanced in the Kubernetes Scheduler to implement Kodi architecture. The feature's name is Device Binding Conditions, and it is one of the functions within DLA. This feature allows Kubernetes Scheduler. Wait pod scheduling until GPU is attached if it is in listle spoo. As a result, we can ensure pod is deployed after GPU is attached. The left figure shows a situation where the GPU has not yet been attached to the node.

And the pod has requested a GPU in the resource pool. When the Kubernetes scheduler detects that the GPU requested by a pod is in resource pool, Kubernetes scheduler postpones scheduling the pod to a node. Without this waiting mechanism, The scheduler will assign the pod to a node before the GPU is attached. It causes a container collating failure because the GPU cannot be found on the node. The right figure shows a situation where the GPU attachment has been completed while the scheduler Is waiting. When the scheduler detects that the GPU has been attached, it resumes pod scheduling. This guarantees that the GPU is available and enabling successful container creation. Although we explained it this way, to describe the feature accurately, Binding conditions allows defining any conditions required for pod scheduling. So, this feature can be applied for more general use cases. In the CALDI use case, the condition is GPU attachment, but in the case of NVIDIA NV-Link, we implement. We planned to collaborate with the NVIDIA GPU GRA driver, and that use case defined the condition is to configure the setting of NVIDIALink. Now, I would like to demonstrate dynamic GPU provisioning.

Overall flow of the demo, and this is the same overall picture that we have been explaining so far. However, this view is a bit too detailed to fully understand. So I will break it down into smaller steps and explain each one. First, phase 0 and 1. The DLI kubelet plugin creates a listle slice for the GPU attached to the node, and the composable DLA driver creates a list slice for the GPU in the listos pool. Next, phase two, here the user creates pod and the resource claim to request the GPU. Phase three and four, here the Kubernetes scheduler refers the created resource claim and GPU list in the list slice. And if there is a GPU in the list slice that meets the requirements of the list claim, it will be arcaded to the pod. Next, phase 5. Here, the Kubernetes scheduler waits the pod scheduling until GPU. In the list flow is attached. At this point, the DLY device binding conditions feature is utilized. Next is phase 6 and 7. Here, dynamic device scaler checks the list claim and updates.

The composability requests. Next 8, 9, and 10 phase. Here, the composable resource operator detects the update to the composability request and sends a GPU attachment to the. To the coding manager. This phase covers the process until the GPU is successfully attached to the node. Last phase is phase 11 and 12. Here, pod scheduling resumes and the pod end. To the running state with the GPU successfully attached to the node. Then let's take a look at the demo screen. Let me explain the detail of the demo screen. Uh let me explain the detail of demo screen. Uh the top left terminal uh is used for uh running a client command uh like kubectl. The bottom left uh is bottom left terminal show the output uh of Currently created listle slice where the lead section represents GPUs already attached to the node, and the green section represents GPUs in the listle spool. Here there is one node attached GPU.

Named GPU0 and one GPU in the little spoo named NVIDIA 880 GPU0. The top right terminal shows the outerput kubectl get Port and we can see the port list. The middle right terminal shows the spec of composability request, so we can see the number of GPU attached to the node. The bottom right terminal shows the information of resource claim. So, we can see which GPU is used by the pod. That is the explanation of demo screen. At this point, we already have one pod created, and that pod is using a single 880GB GPU, which is already attached to the node. At the initial state. Then let's start the demo. We are entering the phase two. This is the YAML contents for pod and resource claim. It might be hard to see. The character is too small, but it specifies the resource claim in the pod spec field. We create a pod.

with cube apply command. This shows les claim is created and it is allocated to the GPU and listource poo named NVIDIA 880 GPU0. For the created pot. Uh phase five, uh, we can see the pot will be created. Yes, uh What I'd like you all to pay attention is the status of the pods. The pod status is currently pending. This pending state indicates that the scheduler is waiting to schedule the pods. This behavior is enabled by the device by. Conditions feature, which provides a glaze period for GPU attachment. Phase 6 and 7, please pay attention to the size field and the composer visual request. We can see the side field has increased from 1 to 2. This change occurred as a result of the device attachment installations from DD.

Phase eight, nine, and ten, we can see that a new GPU will be added. New GPU. Named GPU1 has been attached to the LED resource slice. This makes the GPU visible from Kubernetes. Phase last phase, we can see the port will be successfully lead to the Learning state. Okay. The pod has been successfully deployed. We are able to complete the pod deployment. Without any error, even though we need to perform GPU provisioning during the pod scheduling, this is the GPU provisioning for if we implement it. This concludes the demo. I will wrap my demonstration. Thank you for your attention.

So here so here is a feature challenge this uh about Codi. Um I have no enough time, so I can't explain the detail, but uh There are many challenges to be pranked. That's it for our presentation. Thank you. Any questions or comments? Thank you for thank you for interesting presentation. So I have a uh so I'm interested in the performance of uh Kubernetes system using Codi plugin because so so if we schedule the pods to uh nodes that both uh have both CPU and GPS. It could something like GPU starvation or so or so to the node that is so GPU is free, but CPU is very busy. So, how is the performance in of the

The system in such cases. Your question is uh uh about performance. Uh uh like uh so silver bits or latency or something of the process uh uh port scheduling. Uh you'd would like to know the uh h how how long time to to the device is is attached. No no no. No. But application throughput uh you you'd like to uh Uh want? Excuse me. You would like to know the uh application performance? Uh y yes, so yes, so so what happens? Uh I'm interested in what happens if uh so So if we run heavy workloads, meaning heavy workloads to the uh Kubernetes system with Codi. In this case, uh G G P will be attached uh depending on the put workloads. But the maybe 10 or 20 seconds to w will be attached but we GPU and will be attached to ten or uh twenty seconds time. So uh

Mm. I I recommend uh user uh need to use uh horizon port auto auto auto share feature. Uh by using this feature uh we can increase the number of ports uh be before the Uh we we can increase the number of ports uh in in advance uh b by using uh ho horizon port auto scaler. So in this case uh we can trigger the GP attachment uh before the uh become a heavy work route. Uh Yeah, th this is my uh answer. Okay, thank you. Thank you, yeah. Yeah, we finish our presentation. Thank you.
