Protected DMAbufs and its dynamic memory assignment woes - Sumit Garg

Welcome to this session. So first of all about this protected DMA buffs. So these are very new to the kernel, first of all, uh just to be clear. But uh the use case here for protected DMA buffs is pretty old. Like uh we all play uh secure media content or the Media streaming from Netflix or Amazon Prime or whatnot on our phones. And that use case has been there for more than a decade. And all the implementation for that has remained downstream for the kernel. And we are many different Have been tried to support the upstream use cases, but now we have found a way to make it much more generic. So let me first come on to the use case. Before going there, first of all, who I am. So I'm a member of the Qualcomm open source team. And uh I have I have a keen interest in open source boot and security, um ker from kernel, uh T subsystem to all the boot firmware stages, EDK two, uh, T F A Opti and maintaining bits and pieces here and there. And in U boot, uh the device tree stuff. So yeah I'm all About that, but you can see it's all centered around boot and security. And so that's my core area of interest. Now, to describe the secure media pipeline use case, this is an abstract view how it works, but normally what I've shown here.

in the user space as a G streamer media pipeline because that's the open implementation of any media pipeline. But usually what on the downstream that Netflix or others use, there are WideWind solutions, there is Microsoft PlayRa PlayReady. Those are the user space components. From an open source point of view, we are trying to make a solution with the GStreamer pipeline. And here you can see the components here. Normally, a media pipeline on an unencrypted media stream that works. via the system heap. So mostly all the allocations for your normal media pipeline when you are playing some content on your phone uh that is unencrypted that is going via the system heap and all allocations are uh from there. And uh how the media how the media pipeline is constructed that is usually The decoder comes first and then the display engine and that's the minimal pipeline you would like to see. However, with the encrypted content, there comes the decryption engine in between as well. That is usually a crypto engine or the hardware crypto engine that is being used. Because of the security. So here the main motivation is, or the main use case is like the media content shouldn't be accessible to the kernel or the user space in the plain format. So it should always be in encrypted format and only the pipeline, the device pipeline.

Line that is able to access the content in the plain format, not the kernel or not the user space. So that's where this protected DMA buffs come into picture. And here, what we have come up with via the T subsystem. So, first of all, let me describe the T subsystem. As well, because there might be confusion that confidential computing would also call it a trusted execution environment for the confidential payloads. And here in the ARM Trust Zone world or RISC-5 Ts or the mobile world, we call trusted execution environment that is a piece of software that is very minimal running on the secure side of uh the CPU. Basically what what we call as the secure world. That is that is the minimum T CB which any vendor can trust and uh which is auditable and certified by the by the by the vendor. Basically, the end OEM that is certified so that that piece of software is able to access this secure media content in the plain format as well. So the CPU has two modes of operation: one is the rich world of operation, that is the Linux side, and one is the The trusted OS that is running that is very minimal and it is something that is trusted. That's what we call it. So here you see the T subsystem here is mostly trying to abstract out details about all the hardware implementations of

The trusted OSs that are there. So, global platform is one standard body that is trying to standardize the communication with the trusted OS and all the trusted applications that are running over there. So, here, so why the subsystem here? Because there are every silicon vendor has their own way of establishing memory firewalls. So usually there is an IP block on a SOC that is sitting in front of the DRAM that is enforcing memory protections based on the CPU mode or on the device access side as well. So um different vendors have their own implementations uh like um NXP, Qualcomm, MediaTech. Everybody has their own way to set up the firewalls. And uh that's where uh the T subsystem is providing the abstraction uh for the memory file firewalls to be set up uh for the Buffers. And yeah, so in this case, the content, the encrypted content would be there in the system heap. And the first pipeline, first device in the pipeline would be the crypto engine that would decrypt that content into The protected DMA buffer. And after that, that plain content in the protected DMA buffer would get passed on to the hardware decoder as well as the display engine. And in this pipeline, the software is not able to access the content at all.

So, as I've described already, so the effort has been going for many years, and the mainline kernel we didn't had a use case in the mainline kernel. There were some limitations that were there because there wasn't an end-to-end. Use case in the open. Basically, that was the main obstacle for the kernel mainline to adopt the kernel interfaces, I would say. So the kernel interfaces were being proposed, but not the end-to-end open source use case. That was all the These Widevine or Microsoft PlayReady implementation, they're all like they're not open, they are just downstream and proprietary. And so that's why we are trying to come up with a G streamer-based solution that can be an open stack that anybody can exercise. in the open with Opti. And Opti is one trusted OS implementation that is open source. And here you can see all the things that run on the trusted side of the core is also open. And people can view all the end-to-end use cases. For the secure media pipeline. And the second difficulty was the vendor-specific metadata. So many earlier attempts at the kernel was like people came up with these DME heaps that were vendor-specific because of the memory firewalls. Whatever has to be implemented, they were vendor-specific.

Specific, and so there were like many different DMA heaps being proposed, like from MediaTech or from NXP. So, yeah, that wasn't going to scale because DMA heaps don't allow to plug in the metadata for every vendor. So, the T subsystem. Came into rescue to enable that metadata to be stored within the TE subsystem, and it would be the exporter of the DMA buff that would be consumed by the other subsystems. So there are two ways to implement protected DMA buffers. Is the static carve-out. So, say, for example, the memory firewalls is just set up by the platform during the boot stage, and it's just the reserved memory regions, and which are just consumed by the devices. So, allocation happens from there, and it's just like a reserved piece of memory that kernel comes. Can't reuse, but especially on this mobile devices or the embedded devices or whatever you see in your car, they are resource constraint, like the DRAM is very limited. So, yeah, this car-bought solution could work on there, but when there is like hundreds of megabytes of allocation, For this r for the secure media pipeline, then we are really reaching the limits of the DRAM. So that's why an efficient reuse of memory is needed. So we can't work with these reserved car carve-outs for like m uh very uh

memory constraint devices. Uh so yeah that's the backdrop uh backdrop of this static memory cover-outs. Although it just works, so kernel doesn't have access to the memory at all. But uh yeah uh even the support of scatter gather alloc allocation where the pages can be scattered all across the memory. And for efficient memory to use, this approach just limits us to the shortcomings. Now, the second point is about for protected DMA buffs is the dynamic memory assignment. This is like we can allocate pages from anywhere which are free in the memory. So, similar to the way that system heap works. So, you can allocate pages all over the memory range and you can map it into the DMA address range for the device, and then that will work. But the thing with the protected DMA buffs is like you need to enforce. So the firewalls there are also two solutions to the firewall as well. One is like the IOMMU based, um basically the hypervisor can come into picture. So Qualcomm has uh the solution of the hypervisor that is enforcing the memory protections uh for All the devices, and there are other solutions like I mentioned. There is an IP block sitting in front of the DRAM. The IP block that is sitting there has like very minimal sort of support for very discontinuous pages. Like it can't work on like

many discontiguous page ranges because it has a specific table basically that is limited. You can have like say for example 100 entries in that table, not more than that which are enforced or protected. So yeah, so really we would like to see a use case for dynamic memory assignment where basically you allocate pages from the kernel range and you lend them to the firmware. Basically to the firmware means to the secure side of the CPU and And once you lend that memory, you need to unmap from the kernel side as well. So right now, we don't see an API in the kernel that can allow normal kernel pages to be unmapped dynamically. So that is something. We are looking forward to and trying to see for a solution there. So right now we have this protected DMA buffers being supported by the T subsystem, but we have a big to-do here. So right now we are using this DMA alloc pages. So these are just kernel pages allocated for the DMA purposes. We don't have a way to unmap them from the kernel. So, once they are lent, we are just so any cache speculation, anything is just going to crash because the memory firewall would be set up after this point, and it's not going to work. So, it will work in case there is a high.

Hypervisor and hypervisor does the stage 2 unmapping. But if there isn't a hypervisor, then it's just going to crash basically the system if there is any cache speculation in there. So, what we really want to achieve is like for this dynamic page allocation. A no-map kind of behavior for this dynamic allocations, basically. Yeah, the heterogeneous memory management, I was just looking at the subsystem. I see this API that says exclusive access memory for the devices, and I'm so it's Currently, allowing the user space memory to be reserved to be exclusive access for the device. But now I'm looking at the memory that is allocated in the kernel as well for the exclusive access for the device. Maybe we can extend that or what we are looking is like page and map call chain of interest that is you can see in the kernel this is the call chain we are mostly interested any other idea yeah so one of the sorry one of the items with this HVM and one of the items with this is HMM approach uh that you're talking about versus like well, what you're used to, for example, for an what we call APU approach in AMD, is that this memory always needs some sort of like backing store in regular memory, right? So the thing is whatever's the like located in there would be pretty much like then back put back and forth. Is this something that um is

From your point of view, acceptable? I'm curious about this like using HMM for the approach. Yeah, I see that if there is any excess from the CPU side, it's going to get that from the backup. And then so basically, what we are not worried about that CPU is going. Going to access that memory at all, but we are worried about the speculation that can happen uh during that time. So if you use uh uh memory device private, you don't even have the problem. CPU will treat that as a private device memory. So uh uh what what what I'm coming at is like uh Uh what you are saying is like we need to migrate that to device, right? For every memory allocation, all the pages we have we need to migrate that to device, right? So basically we need uh we sorry I think yeah you you'd have to migrate it for device private. Because it's completely, you know, it's just a fictional page almost. I sort of wrote the device exclusive side of code that I think you've just found as well, but that was very specific to user space mappings, as I think you mentioned. It sounds more like what you need is something that will actually unmap the page from the linear map. which to avoid CPU speculative access, which I've had similar bugs come. I I don't know of any good solution off the top of my head either. Like the device private stuff, i it requires migration which defeats the purpose and the device exclusive is very, very user space driven.

There would be multiple devices involved, so we need to migrate for every device problem. I don't know. I haven't looked at it. I'd be interested to think about it, but um so I'm working on a patch that that adds a GFP flag that lets you allocate pages from the normal page allocators that are already unmapped and it takes care of Arranging them in a way that optimizes the TLB flashes and stuff. Which sounds like it might help you, but I'm not sure I understand why you can't just use the normal page allocator and then use like set direct map valid. So there's an API that just, it might not be very efficient, but you should already be able to do that. So maybe I'm missing why you can't just do that. So there is an API like DMA alloc attributes, uh where you can set no kernel mapping. So I'm interested to hear about whether that API is memory efficient on the similar term like you allocate from the system heap. Uh so all the pages that are scattered, whether that also allows uh The scattered pages to be allocated if the IOMMU supports it or not. But if you integrate this deeply into the page allocator, then there shouldn't be very much scattering because the whole design of the page allocator tries to avoid that. Okay. Yeah, maybe we can chat in the I probably don't understand the problem well enough to so I guess just to be clear you kind of need these pages like completely unmapped from every page table on the GPU which I think is probably maybe that helps answer your question maybe. I I'm not sure.

Are you saying that that you have to like synchronize it with the IMMU and the IRMU also has to unmap it? Uh ye uh yes, I uh unmapping is like from the kernels of page table only, basically. Yeah, IRMMU I think maybe I can help. Is there any any further questions? two cases which we discussed. One is using the IOMMU and hypervisor doing the revised L memory protection. So why are we actually using TE framework to do that? So it's nothing to do with TE framework at all and this API seems to go via TE APIs and is there is there a plan to abstract it in a in a way that uh uh people can not use the e-framework at all? Just go. So yeah, um uh I was recently chatting with Dan as well about confidential compute use cases maybe uh in future. So yeah, um uh there would be use cases that will come up um because certainly we wouldn't we would be having confidential guests as well and the devices. And not the host be able to access the memory, and only the guest and the devices would be able to access the memory. So, yeah, there would be use cases, but as it happens, it's going to be an evolution, I would say. When the use cases come up, then we are going to evolve from there. Yeah, okay.

That's it. Thank you.
