Plumbing SDXI into Linux: From DMA Engine to User‑Space Offloads - Wei Huang

Thank you for coming. And I will get started. My name is Wei Huang. I work for AMD Linux team. Today I'm going to talk about a new device we are developing and the current status of this new device. So as part of the presentation, I'm going to give a quick kind of overview. Will be about what SDXI can do, what's the features, and what's the benefit of this new device. And after that, it will be like a more like a kernel implementation status. We have starting to submit our patch set to the upstream, and we want to get. Some feedback from the community. And also, there are different phases of the implementation, and we want to get some feedback about the direction for our next phase. So, about SDXI, this is a new device kind of specification. Developed under SNIA and is a collaboration between different industry companies, including like Dell, VMware, and AMD, and others, especially also some other stop and storage companies. Offers about this one, the main thing is about the memory operation. It can do the cross-address memory operation without with a minimum CPU interaction. So the idea is we

We want to have some extensible specification that support this type of the memory operations you guys can come up with. And for the use case itself, SDXI could be used in different systems, could be something like the Like a mem zeroing or mem copy across different devices, or it could do the like a network memory copying and so on. So the SDXI design itself is by itself is a PCIe endpoint. Device. So it comes up with the support SRIOB. And each function can do a lot of the operation by itself. So I'm going to show a little bit more details quickly. And the capability and the configuration is basically access. In the memory. So here, just show you one diagram, and it's basically the bottom of the diagram kind of is the architect of the SDXI. So the SDXI. function, uh it basically uh most of them uh actually all the functions uh relies on the MMIO register and the uh in memory data structure. So we uh designed this back uh with the idea that trying to be able to support the uh uh save and restore. So uh only MMIO and uh uh and and

Memory used to do the device management. And there are two levels of the like not page table, two levels of data structures to support a lot of context, like up to over 65 sites. Context, and I will show you quickly the context itself is the execution unit. And I also want to point out the key here, another two key components. One is the R key. So this is a kind of receiving key table, and that basically is like a security checking for the incoming traffic. So, to monitor the system traffic and guardrail the security. And the last one is error log. A lot of error log being implemented here to be able to handle, for example, context failure and also function failure and so on. Like maybe address space not being handled properly and ATS failure and so on. So all the details are in the specification. You can take a look at it. I also want to point out the bottom here. There's address space I highlighted in the green box. So this is a key concept for the STXI. And they basically use the pass it for a lot of the memory access. I will show some other examples later on. So, about the context itself, I mentioned that this is the key execution unit. So, the context basically handles all the

Descriptors submitted from the user. So basically, you can see that in that green box, and it basically there's a context control data structure, point to sub-data structures like descriptor ring, which handles like it's a circular buffer. For the descriptor submission. There are like other data structures like write index value, similar to a lot of the PCI endpoint device design. And the last one is the context status. I you can see that that uh the kind of right portion is highlighted uh in gray area. So this is uh in its own data uh address base. Uh you can see that uh you can control the uh the this address space uh using uh different pass it uh in the uh uh SDXI data structures. So about the address space, so the key here is be able to access like different address space. By default, most of the PCIN device you only access the It's on the address space by default. The same case applies to XDXI. But XDXI also in its descriptor, when you submit it, you can actually specify, kind of extend it, the target buffer or the source buffer with extension. We call it a key entry.

And this pair, AK entry plus the address, kind of give you the like be able to specify where you want to read a memory from or write a memory to. And the AK entry itself contains the target function that you want to access to, and also it contains the entry. Of the passet ID of that function. So, this AK entry has basically two pairs, kind of indicate where that address is living in. So, with that, as I say, the R key will validate the incoming traffic. The archi-entry has that capability to check if that incoming traffic for a specific function is allowed or not. About the descriptor itself, the design is 64-byte descriptors. And for now, they are being developed with different categories. As you can see, there were some DMA copy descriptors. That's the most important one, maybe. And there are some other atomic operations. And for the administration group, by the way, I forgot to mention the context zero is for. The administration purpose so that all the functions have a context zero reserve for the administration operations. So the administration can do like a function update, context update, and so on. And also the SDXI also provide the internet.

So, this is a separate descriptor group. The most important thing I would say is it actually allows a vendor extension. So, there's a special group your vendor can develop, maybe for like MAMDIF or encryption or whatever. CRC uh you you want to do, you can uh extend it uh over there. So they all put it in the uh same sixty four byte uh uh descriptor format and uh y you are able to uh uh discover the vendor support uh through some uh mechanism. Uh I'm not showing here, but uh Yeah, it's all in the specification. So here is like a quick example. In this example, I showcase memcopy from a user process inside a VM to another user process inside another VM. So there are two virtual functions, one, both of them. Each of them being passed through to the VM1 and VM2. And when we submitted the descriptor in the VM1, it can basically say that, hey, I want to copy memory from myself to another VM. And in that case, the AK entry itself can. Contains information about the, we call it the target function, right? And that target function is contained in the VM1's AK entry, and also there's a passing associated with that process in the VM2. So that information combined together, you can

Do mem copy without the hypervisor interaction. There's some prior setup and so on, but yeah, this should be just a very simple example, show you how the old thing works. So the STXI software design, we have been working on this software system for STXI, obviously very similar to a lot of existing software Designed to do device pass-through, and then on the host side, you have the physical function STXI driver running on both PF and VF, the same driver. So, when you look at this diagram, I want you to kind of put it in the mapping relationship. is basically the STXI function is mapped to the virtual virtual machine. And the context itself is more like a to every process in that virtual machine. So this is a very like a high level mapping relationship and you can you can use that. Um uh question? Uh so actually maybe the previous slide, so the passet you use to communicate is that uh what's the name space? Is it system-wide global passage? Uh it's uh system-wide global passet. Yeah. Actually, no. Um sorry.

The the pass it itself is that tar as we call it as the target functions pass it. So there are different ways you can allocate it, pass it. Even right now in Linux, the like I think right now SPA and Linux use a global passet for the implementation. But it Doesn't matter because as long as the the uh when the traffic coming in, you go through IOMMU and then you get, for example, AMD IOMMU, you use the pass it, whatever the pass it for the S you you go through a device table entry and then find the uh GCR3 and use pass it to find the GCR3. So it should shouldn't matter. If I understand correctly, the the AM deposit table can be uh GPA or HPA. So you're using, I guess, HPA this tape or host SPA. Yeah. So how do you make sure there's no conflict, I guess? I mean, how how do you make sure that the paths you use for VM one are not you know, it's not used I mean, it's not conflicting with oh, you're separating Okay, so uh I don't know, any other question here? All right, so I I will continue. And the uh the implementation, we kind of uh intentionally split this uh uh design into uh two different phases.

After talking with Upstream, there was some feedback from Upstream about how we approached this problem. Especially, this is a part of the intention for this presentation. So, the first part of the implementation we submitted is a DMA engine. So, this is obviously the first. Use case for SDXI device. So you we hook up with the DMA engine layer of the S Linux system and provide SDXI device as the DMA engine. So it does a basically mem copy. uh and also the uh uh give us the opportunity to kind of introduce the uh uh STXI data structures uh including all the MMIO and all those um like control control data structure and so on. And the um it it has uh I would say it's relatively uh Straightforward implementation. There's some limitation. Right now, the DMA engine we only support the PURMO, but we haven't got the IRQ completion in place. So you can only do DMA test with PUMO. But we have been working. On the IRQ completion in inside and the next read is should include that. And the locking mechanism and so on, those are also fairly simple. So right now the F uh RFC of this patch set has been I would say two months, two months.

And we got some feedback from the community, Bion and Jonathan from Huawei, and so get some feedback from that. So, the next one, we actually got this one working in-house, but we also want to get some feedback from. Community is about the user space support. So we want to be able to assign that SDXI owned by the user space. So what we are proposing is SDXI iOCTO and there are two categories of the APIs. One is to the device level. And that's allow the iOcto to control the device with like a administrative priv uh level of the uh uh privilege. And the second one is the uh allow the uh user space to control that SDXI uh device. So I access that. My first kernel patches were DM Engine offload. It's been 20 years of DM Engine always losing to CPU over time or other device offload. Why? Why are we doing STXI? I'm kind of okay with in-kernel use cases, but when we get to start doing new user ABIs for things that we're not sure are going to be there five years from now, if we can hide 100% of this in the kernel and we offload some very heavy memory copy things that are rare to hard to find, like I couldn't find it for 20 years, then maybe, but user ABIs.

Yeah. So to answer your question, I think nowadays the CPU design, I agree that most of memcopy is high performance. No, pretty much you couldn't beat the CPU memcopy performance. However, if the CPU cycle is precious for you, you still consider like of loading that to a a third party device. And then secondly, there are certain operations that CPU is not good at, like the encryption and there are certain operations that CPU is not good. So this type of thing, SDXI may be able to jump into the help. U API. From the first description, I was expecting that there would be an MMAP-based interface where you do like a 64-byte MMIO to start the descriptors. Is that also part, or is that future thing? Because if you always go through iOcto, then there's obviously Yeah, yeah, there's a map map, MmAP, but actually the I kind of not show it here. Actually, the user space will be able to own this gray area as a context, so they don't need to do MmAP, actually. on that address using passive by itself. So the the M map I mean would be that that you can do the MMIO on the uh to to to trigger it an operation instead of having to go through an ectel? Yeah, you can you can do that. Uh there's a d a doorbell ring that need to happen.

To allow the software to inform hardware that we the software submitted a descriptor. So yeah, we can we can take it offline. I'll I'll try to wrap up. So what um we we have some covered some points here and uh we're going to uh go forward uh with uh the uh uh DMA engine part, and that will send another revision before the end of the year. And also for the user space support, I would appreciate all the feedbacks, offline discussion. For the tool support, I've been kind of on and off working on the QMU emulation for SDXI emulated device. So hopefully you can get it done. If that gets some interest from your community, we can share that as well. So the last ask is about a use case. We tested the mem copy, mem zeroing, and some of the folio Page copying and also on TB with SDXI device. And if there are other use cases, we would love to hear from the community. Yeah? Thank you for that. Yeah.
