Kernel TEE subsystem BoF - Jens Wiklander, Sumit Garg

Welcome to this BOF. I think it's the last one and it's in the evening. So thanks for coming to this session. So mostly it's about how the T subsystem is progressing and what are the open items right now in the T subsystem. And we want to discuss like what are all the dependencies We have on the other subsystems as well because it can't work in isolation. And we are working on many use cases which require support from different subsystems as well. So here we are trying to list down and discuss every use case.

We so Jens Viklander is maintainer for the T subsystem and and I am there as a reviewer. And just to give a brief introduction about the T subsystem itself, what it is about. So usually we so on ARM systems that's this Concept of a trusted execution environment. This started day back in the early 2000s, and it was like the main driver of these trusted execution environments are the secure media pipeline use cases or all the content streaming use cases, and then on your phone. You would see all the mobile payment use cases or the fingerprint readers. So basically, this trusted execution environment was where all these software stacks ran. They were like very minimal, or the TCB for these stacks. Was very minimal that you don't trust the whole Linux operating system for your security-critical use cases, like your mobile payments or your fingerprint readers or the secure media pipeline use cases, where the content is important and you don't want that content to. leak to anybody else. So yeah, the T subsystem, it got introduced in like 4.12 kernel and since then we are trying to evolve it in an open source manner. Many other so it's like it has been like 2018 or 2019.

Only when this got in mainline, but the development around it is like going on from early 2000s, and it has this tech has been all downstream before the T subsystem got into picture in upstream. And that has been possible with an open source implementation that is of. And that is there on the GitHub when Lenaro opened it up in 2014 or so. And we started with the driver for Opti and Trusted OS. And Jens was the one who was following it up. And thanks to his work, we were able to land this subsystem in. the kernel so that we can drive the security use cases on mobile and uh various different uh uh form factors. Now nowadays this uh trusted OS is being heavily used in the IOT and the edge uh space as well where people are having so So, not on all the IoT and Edge devices, there are TPMs available. So, people use these trusted execution environments to store their security critical data like key and all the crypto to happen on the trusted execution environment side. And now we are here. We have seen a lot of evolution in between. And yeah, Jens, can you turn to the next slide? So, yeah, right now we have in the T subsystem, we have multiple trusted OS implementation. Opti was the beginning.

One and we also have the AMDT that was another architecture. So Opti was based on ARM Trust Zone and AMDT was like a coprocessor which was executing your trusted execution environment and which was a piece of code that People could trust and people could rely upon. And rather than because the TCB of the kernel is very huge, and people try to move their all security-critical assets to the trusted execution environment. It's similar like TPMs as well. So, TPMs are like extra. External to the SOC, and it's like very much implementation that is abiding by the specification of the TPM. But here, these trusted execution environments are offering you customizable trusted application which people can write and providing you. The performance of the similar like you have you are executing on the normal uh in the Linux environment as well as if you run in the trusted execution environment, the performance is on the similar parity. Uh but yeah uh you can think of it like TPM is more Prone to hardware-based attacks, and this is like more prone, more basically protecting against hardware-based attacks, but it's more like the shack attacks or like software-based attacks. The T provides you protection of that sort, and that is mostly required for many of.

The use cases like for IoT devices and others. So, yeah, right now the topics of discussion for today is the protected DMA buffers. And this is something that Jens introduced initially. So, Jens, would you like to talk about something on protected DMA buffs? Yes, so yeah, it was merged into this kernel later on. Um and uh yeah. Uh so far it's not deployed of course, but uh there's quite a bit of echo, isn't there? Echo? Um I'm not sure where it's coming from. I can ign ignore it. Yeah, just go on. So we don't have any socks that has picked it up yet, as far as I know, but that's opport opportunity for downstream implementations to rebase and uh use this as a yeah, reference or a base. And so we can have consolidation of around this and uh yeah, basically make new solutions easier when you rebase to a new kernel. So yeah, this protected DMA buffers use case, it's like this secure media pipeline use case that has been there for ages, I would say, and people have been trying to get it upstream in the mainline kernel using different

Mechanism with vendor-specific heaps and all other mechanisms. They didn't make into mainline because of all the stuff around the metadata with these heaps and the mechanism how you put firewalls in in front of buffers to protect it from the kernel and the user space. The whole point of this secure media pipeline use cases is like to protect against kernel and the user space. So basically the operating system itself. And the content should only be available in the media pipeline uh to be to be to be honest. So it's delivered to the device in an encrypted form, but uh it should remain in protected buffers while it's being uh after the decryption has been done and all the further devices in the chain should only be able to access that content and not the operating system itself. So, the whole point of protected DMA buffer is this. So, r recently, the the the patch set that Jens pushed upstream was like uh we we got it introduced in the T subsystem because we can abstract out all the vendor specific metadata h there. But uh now what we We are looking at is like peripheral support, like all the GPU, camera, display, and everything in the pipeline for a media streaming use case should be able to consume these protected DMA buffers. And that would require.

Like user space ABI changes. So, say for example, if from user space and we take GStreamer as a reference, like to establish a pipeline, right now GStreamer is allocating from system heap, and that's how The allocation happens, and afterward, the content is being put into there, and it is decoded, and then it is displayed to the user. But what we need is like encryption would be another stage in between, and then there would be a crypto engineer. In between, that is hardware accelerator that can have access to the keys to decrypt the content in the protected DMA buffers. And afterwards, those protected DMA buffers are consumed by the pipeline. So it would require changes in the G streamer pipeline as well. To switch, to give an option to allocate from the protected DMA buffs. And again, an G streamer as a user space application should be able to point to the device that this is a protected DMA buffer you are consuming, and then the device switches into a mode or basically. Basically, the IOMMU configuration that says, yeah, use this stream ID instead, which is allowed to access that protected DMA buffer content, not the stream ID, which is for the IOMMU basically.

Device needs to know that I'm consuming now protected DMA buffers, not the normal buffers. Otherwise, the device won't be able to access. So there would be like multiple stage changes. So in user space ABI, say for example in V4L2 subsystem, as well as for a display subsystem. So yeah, um that those are the things that will need to be supported. And that's why it's not like only uh the T subsystem is going to provide or enable whole secure media pipeline use case, but it's like the whole chain or different subsystems involved as well. That's the end-to-end secure media pipeline only. And then uh there is this dynamic buffer protection as well. So um in a secure media pipeline use case, when allocating from system heap, you can utilize memory very efficiently. Like you can allocate pages where it is um In the discontiguous space, wherever they are, whichever free page you find, and you are able to allocate. But when the protection comes for the buffers, it's like the protection can be in many ways. It can be based on IOMMU if the hypervisor is able to provide that kind of isolation. For the virtual machines, or it can be based on the hardware IP. That is, like with TrustZone, they introduce this Trust Zone address-based controllers, or every vendor has their own implementation of a hardware IP and how they enforce protections. And they are limited in terms of.

Enforcing protections, like there can be a limited number of entries in that IP which can protect. So, and even the granularity might not be at the page level, it can be like the block level or something like that. So, yeah, we need to support all that different scenarios. That different vendor support, and some of it can be abstracted in the trusted OS like Opke, and some of it can be abstracted in the T subsystem within the kernel as well. Yeah. So, sorry for my ignorance here, but how would That works with the TZ side, the application running on there. Is there any clear API between that and the way of giving the buffers, giving the buffers out again to the user space? I'm confused, if that is. Something we dictate to the vendor like how they need to write the application on the TZ space? Maybe it's a dumb question because I don't know if TZ is so good for that. Yeah, sure. I think that's a valid use case. And very much. So that's why we are trying to abstract out for the user space. So this heap type, like for this use case. case secure video playback, uh the application only needs to allocate from the single heap or uh this single heap type like secure video playback and then pass on that buffer to different devices involved in the pipeline. That would be the same for every vendor, so there's no difference for them, so that's you can rely on that.

Yeah. So basically we are trying to abstract all the vendor specific implementation underneath. Some of it would be abstracted in the T subsystem and some of it would be abstracted in the trusted OS itself, on the TZ side itself. Yeah, um so the whole so earlier uh i earlier efforts at upstreaming this was uh uh the problem was mostly this only, that every vendor came up with their own heap for allocation uh for protected DMA buffs and there was no way to like standardize for the user space that uh Yeah, uh for which vendor I need to pick it, uh pick which heap. So even like uh uh vendors do have like multiple heaps as well. So it's like for protection, say for example, whatever device is in the pipeline, you need you you want to provide exclusive accesses. to that device only. So what they did was like they created multiple heaps for multiple devices uh because it was like they uh it can be rather done in a way like we can switch that protection when the device attaches or detaches uh with the buffer, with the DMA buffer. those protections can be changed during that time as well. So we are trying to make that uh flow work uh with like dynamic uh detach and attach, and then the protections can be changed uh as per which device is trying to attach or detach, so basically. So yeah, uh this is all uh

I would say this is the first step we have taken, but all the device support is going to require that logic and definitely the silicon vendors needs to come in and put in that logic, that how you put the protections, because protections are all silicon vendors. specific only. Yeah. Jens, anything you want to say? Alright? Yeah, you could say one thing about uh the protection. I mean we also can base this on FFA and then you get a lot of abstraction for how to Protect devices and stuff. Yeah, so basically in the ARM world, so ARM came up with this FFA specification that allows memory land, buffers landing to the to the different either it's it could be a virtual machine or it could be um firmware that is trust zone. So yeah, that allows that thing but the thing I have been discussing with people is like uh we we still are dealing with when the buffer i has been lent to the trust zone or uh any other entity, uh how do we unmap it from the kernel linear map. So the problem uh statement is that and I have heard during this conference many different ideas um because uh the main point here we want to avoid any cache speculation uh for that buffer or the pages uh we allocate and um there were m multiple suggestions I got so one of them was like

Like marking those pages as device type, not the normal memory. So that could turn it like into a that could avoid cache speculation for those buffers because once you get a cache speculation, the system is going to hang dependent on the protection. Or if it It's like you can get a bot if it's like IOMMU, but if it's like a different IP sitting in between the CPU and the memory, then you can get bus hangs as well, where the system just hangs and nothing happens afterwards. So, yeah, there are different ideas. So, hence, there was like Like one idea also, like we use DMA attribute no kernel mapping for the allocations. That would just not provide us a page, page kind of allocation. Right now, we are using DMA alloc pages. We can try to switch. To DMA alloc attributes with no kernel mapping. So that is the other idea that I got from here. Yeah, just your comments on there. Okay. So what I'm trying to say. Is there is a DMA attribute, no kernel mapping. So that would basically won't provide us a list of pages when we are allocating protected buffers. And basically, we won't have any kernel mapping at that point for this protected DMA buffers.

So what are we talking about now, the dynamic allocation of the majority of the data? So that means that it uh either the kernel has already unmapped memory that it do these allocations from So basically what we are doing right now, DMA alloc pages, it's it's mapping that memory as well in the kernel space. I think it's mapped already when you do the allocation. So DMA alloc pages is going to map, right? Or There is a special app attribute that says no kernel mapping. DMA alloc attribute is the API. Okay, maybe it depends on how the system is configured or something. Often when you do DMA alloc, you will invite do it from CMA yeah there are multiple how it's computable attributes like um there is this um force contiguous allocation DMA attribute and that can provide you a contiguous buffer but right now what we are using it's not contiguous Buffers we are allocating as part of dynamic allocation. But yeah, we need to see what fits best in our use case. And efficient memory usage, again, that's going to require, that's not being solved by this because then we need

to have like uh a page that is somewhere sitting in the memory and that is mapped uh that is allocated and mapped and we need to there isn't there isn't a generic API that can unmap that page right now. So so FFA Uh lend. I'm not sure if there is any other user of that API, um but um i it's the opti uh right now. Yeah, yeah. But I think remapping has device uh memory. That's I mean That should work, I guess. Yeah, I think uh we we can try that as well. Uh m just remapping it as device memory should avoid any cache speculation on there. So yeah, uh these are multiple ideas I got here. So yeah that that is an interesting problem we are trying to solve it in the T subsystem. so that um uh we have a generic way for memory to be allocated in the normal kernel way or in the normal system heap way and then um protect it and via landing it or via um any any mechanism that the TZ offers basically. So yeah, uh the other topic that we have is like uh T bus devices and the DT dependency. So there is a long and there is a patch set that has been um long pending for reviews, like or I would say

It has been reviewed multiple times but we haven't found an uh exact solution to the problem. So the remote proc firmwares, it was especially the ST microelectronics. They earlier used to load all the remote proc uh firmwares in the kernel. Now they want to uh move the verification towards the secure world as well in the OPT or TZ. And uh then what they are trying what they came up was they added a compatible in the DT uh that was for opti based uh remote proc verification. So but uh it was like the d the driver itself was probing on platform bus and then switching to the T bus framework uh for all the verification. So T bus is like uh a dynamic discoverable uh bus uh that is not based on DT and it's like we discover device uh services from Opti and then we probe the devices. And yeah uh it it's like mixing two bus architectures and uh trying to work out on that remote probe approach. Uh so I was mostly against to that. Uh Um device tree compatibles, especially for the firmware implementations, right? So uh yeah I think the author is going to rework it as well. So but yeah, it's going to be the um same thing when we are going to deal with other services as well where

Remote where device tree is a dependency, like you have for the remote proc subsystem, there are many device tree properties like P handles or things like that, which needs to come from device tree, which can't be like probed from like Opti or the T service. like how device tree functions. So so what I was proposing to them is like have the device specific bindings for this remote proc implementation like how you do for a PCI device or things like that. So yeah, uh that that's another part of the discussion. and I hope the author would rework it. Then yeah, the RPMB subsystem and the QT driver. Uh so QT driver is the new addition uh to to the T subsystem where uh Qualcomm uh for for long has been having this um downstream or um the proprietary implementation of a trusted OS that has been running on their targets and they pushed the driver um like um recently and we were able to get it reviewed uh and there are user space libraries um for this Qt driver that you can use and try to run some applications over there and run test applications. So there is documentation around this Qt driver, how you can use it. And yeah, I think the next one is this opti RPMD kernel interface.

And yeah, this is something that was uh a major thing that we got. Yeah, again, Jens work on this. So Jens, do you want to speak something about this RPMB sys subsystem? Yes, sure. Uh one good thing with this is that RPMB becomes available to the your world before user space in Linux is available, typically during boot. And and also that you don't need to uh because we have a something called a T supplicant that before routed the RPMB uh frames to the device and now when we can do it In kernel, we don't have that dependency during boot, so we don't have to have this up at 20 inch or MFS, for instance, or switch it off of boot and all that complicated things. So that's a good thing. Yeah, it was like for opti secure storage, essentially we Rely on this special partition on the flash devices that is RPMB. So that is replay protected memory block. And since it's a common flash that is shared, that is available on most embedded and IoT targets. like we need to share that uh among Opti and the l and the Linux kernel. So Linux kernel owns the flash driver. And earlier we used to have this T supplicant in the user space which was like enabling us to access that flash and the

Secure storage from Opti point of view via RPC calls. And with this RPMB subsystem, we were able to remove the user space daemon dependency and rather route all the RPMB accesses via the kernel. So, yeah, again, this RPM. RPMB driver was discussed for long in upstream. And then we got this use case for Opti, and we were able to merge it. And yeah, Ian's is the maintainer for that subsystem again. And we got this EMMC in the beginning, EMMC flash. Uh hooked up into that RPMB subsystem. Now recently we got the UFS support as well uh in that um RPMB subsystem. So Yens do you know uh what it would take for NVMe support to be added there as well? Is it similar like UFS? Mm, it's um it it's probably different from UFS and EMMC because I don't think it has a compatibility mode like UFS has, because at the moment we can use the same kind of frames, yeah, our PMB frames. So, that's one thing that has to be changed of course. But I don't think there's any fundamental problem uh that needs to be solved. It's just a matter of someone wanting to do the work. So yeah, um the the major benefits of this RPMB subsystem have really been the firmware TPM implementations as well as uh the EFI secure variables

Storage that was a problem earlier because you can't have those use cases working in the kernel until the user space daemon was up. So, yeah, those are really solved. And for the distros, they were very much struggling to package this team. Supplicant daemon. So, for distros, having it in the kernel, implemented in the kernel, really solve the problem for the distros to integrate opti-based systems. And yeah, the next topic is exposing T-implementation revision. This is something. Yeah, well has been discussed on the mailing list. Again, Jens, would you like to elaborate? Yeah, sure. So basically we print a version string describing the version of the opti during boot in in the kernel and uh apparently that's useful for some people so they wanted to dig out that information uh for yeah later use post boot and and he uh gave a few examples like you can from you can print out The version of BIOS, for instance, in many systems. So, in a way, it makes sense. But what we want to avoid is that you shouldn't make decisions about capabilities or what could be available. It's more something that you use in.

I said when you debug your system, if it's searching for some errors, then it could be useful to know what version you have, but you shouldn't code it in software in order to make decisions about what features you think would be available. So I think the main question here is: how much we use sysfs to Put a revision of different firmwares or different implementations and whether it is abused by the applications to write code in a way that is compatible with one revision and compatible with another one. that's the thing we are trying to brainstorm it. And there are examples in the kernel, like App Armour or others, where they put the revision in sysfs. And uh yeah, uh we are tending towards uh it's right now uh we are trying to limit it to so that the revision can be Uh fetched from the logs only rather than from any CFS ABI. But the author is like the distro folks, I think, from Canonical, he is right, who is pushing that patch. And yeah, distro. People are seemingly looking for revision information like which version of Opti is running. And for them, the logs are not reliable, the D message logs. And they are saying, if we have a saner way, like the sysfs, to get the revision information, that would be.

better for them. So yeah so what I think is like we may get ahead with this if you don't have objections, if it's a common information. Anybody has any other opinions? No? So Jens, what do you think about it? Yeah, I think that we will probably accept it. So there are okay, let me okay. So there are comments on the channel as well. So, from Jan. Okay, sysfs version would be useful as well. And yeah, so yeah, okay. Uh so yeah, we'll jump forward with that one. So yeah, let's let's Go ahead probably. And uh I think sysfs is the way to go forward. We shouldn't be using some ioctals or something like that, information on that. So sysfs is the way to go, probably. Yeah, okay. Uh and then this RISC-V opti driver ABI. been have you been following up on this, Yins? Or I I I have been seeing the opti uh support being merged for risk five. Uh have you been aware about any A B I for the kernel on this front too? No, I haven't seen the kernel part at all. Okay.

So it's mostly like opti is being up right now and no kernel with that opti support. Yeah, I think it's also I mean the the optic support for risk five is it's not very I mean I wouldn't say n not great, but I mean it they are in the Yeah m okay, uh so we may need to wait. Yeah. Um hi, um so currently I see there's only two countries, um SNC and F F A. supported for ARM. Yeah. Um my question is is there any plan to make the driver more generic and architecture independent to support like for for example Riskify? So yeah, the whole reason we have in the opti driver, there are A B I's like we support SMC ABI, FFA ABI. So it should be possible just to add another A B I for RISC V. Uh so yeah, that's that's the only reason why we created that abstraction in Um opti driver itself. And we are just looking for, yeah, I know it should be architecture agnostic, and yeah, similarly, uh a RISC-V ABA can be implemented as well. But we are yet to know what is the standardization that RISC-V is going to have on the firmware interface.

Yeah, it's under development, so I guess in the future we need to um maintain both architecture within a within a driver. Yeah, sure. I think uh that would be another ABA, but yeah, similar like uh in the in the ARM world we had this SMC ABA that was created before the FFA came in and then we moved on to FFA uh we created FFA ABI as well. But really for RISC-PI we should uh really look at a standardized ABI from the beginning that we can uh stick to uh in the longer run as well. I I I guess it's something like uh cafe but for risk five I guess that we are looking for. Yeah, we are looking forward to it actually. So yeah. Sorry for one more question but might be off topic. The upt OS GitHub repository has pre-merged CI to test different platforms. And currently, this file only has compile time check. So And I I hope that we can provide a runtime check for RaceFire as well. So is there any guidance to add uh CI support for different architecture? I think uh that would be like extension to op

build system uh that yeah you you know opti uses build root based setup and definitely I think build root should support risk five support as well. So we are generally following the Opti uh repos um mainly uh the mainline build root setup. If uh Uh the mainline build route supports RICS RISC-V in in proper way. Again, what we have seen right now, RISC-V doesn't have kernel driver support uh as we are talking about here. So it's uh generally what Jens has mentioned, it's just like booting up to the opti opti console, I would say, and uh nothing to communicate with it. So yeah, uh uh from CI testing point of view, it would be like uh what would be functional on Camo I would say. If if there is enough Camu support in the option RISC-V port then Uh RISC-V has um m Vert machine support to run Opti test. Is there an Opti platform for RISC-V Vert or Camo? Okay, so yeah Camo can be used. Yeah, um so it's just like adding support in uh uh Opti as a platform for And in the RISC-V space. And then, sure, I think Jens would also welcome the opti-build environment changes, whatever you come up with. And it is extensible. We prefer vendors to add support there in the opti-build environment so that it can be the one setup that people can go.

And use. The Camu setup has been really helpful for the optic development on ARM. So surely RISC-V would be able to reuse that stuff, whatever we are doing. So even the RPMB support in Camu being virtualized and that really helps. Like the problems that people face in real production environment, we can debug it on camo. So, in the CI setup, if you look, there is RPMB emulation support as well integrated, and you can enable RPMB as well in the CI loop. So, sure, so it's just Like contributing to the opti-build environment for the RISC-V. Thank you. One note on CI. So basically, if you can type make check in the standard build setup, that's what's needed for to put it. So if you can do that for RISC-V then you're how yeah basically there is make check uh that is what you need to enable for risk five as well. Yeah, the last one is about the vert IO T device. Okay, there is question oh. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So there is comment about uh I was wondering if trusted services are also intending to work within Opti on existing platforms instead of

the EDK two standalone MM. I think it's mostly related to EFI uh secure runtime variables. That's what I I can think of it like because a standalone MM relates to that uh EFI s variables only. So I think how that EFI secure storage was implemented as a pseudo-TA in Opti. It's very special way how we integrate that pseudo-TA and supporting it. As a trusted service, I think Jens could do you know if there is anything trusted OS as a logical trusted OS probably. So in Opti we have support for four services in if they package like uh secure petitions in in FFA uh and I think that SGMM is also a bit in that direction, but not the entire way. Uh we don't have any concrete plans to do anything more in that unless someone is willing. So yeah, there is also this trusted services project as well in the trusted firmware community and they are using Opti as the base as one environment to test those trusted services. So surely if this equation is a very important thing, we have a lot of

CFI secure variable support. If it comes as a trusted service, Opti should support it as well, right, Jens? Yes, we should be able to do that. Yeah, yeah. Okay, I think the last topic was Virt.io or virtual. Virtualization with Opti. So, yeah, there are many solutions to it. The FFA approach of virtualization that Zen currently supports, but right now for KVM-based machines, we are still trying to work out how this virtualization is. Support can be added for Opti to communicate and provide services to the guest virtual machines. And yeah, this idea of this Vert IoT device is something that AMD folks came up with for the T subsystem earlier, but we got a VERT IOT device in the Specification, but nothing has progressed on that front. And um so yeah, uh it's like if we want any architecture agnostic solution, so ARM um has this FFA solution, but if we want something architecture agnostic that builds on top of T subsystem, then yeah, uh Um this can be an alternative uh which can support uh all the different back ends um um in the user space basically. So yeah that's that's it mostly. Any any other topic? Or do you have anything? Okay, we are already yeah

I think, yeah. Okay. Thank you, everyone. Bye-bye.
