Extending eBPF to GPU Device and Driver Contexts - Yusheng Zheng, Tong Yu

Hello everyone, uh good afternoon and my name is Yu Xianjun and I'm also talking about expanding like EVPF to here we have both GPU device and uh GPU driver. So what we are doing is not only for observability but we are only one We also want to target some like resource management, maybe some like memory or some kind of scheduling. We have structs for this kind of test. And we also have like a device-side eBPF runtime, which is rebuilt on top of BPF time or pre-funded. Used to work, we are trying to offload eBPF to GPU, which is mainly for profiling. It has a bunch of observability tools, and it can insert props like dynamic binary instrumentation. And maybe it can also work for like prefetch and schedule. And we also talk about how we go. to build these runtimes and the background problems and because like why we are going why we want to build this kind of two things. The f first is the background of GPU stacks. We've seen there there's mu multiple user space applications and each Each application might have a video stack, each application might have a user space runtime. In cell Inland S library, then we will have a kernel driver, which we have like memory management, maybe UVM, and like me channels for

And like TSK for scheduling. Like on device we have might be a firmware and a bunch of hardware feature, like hardware schedulers, and we have user kernels running on online. So a kernel driver is like a operating system component of GPUs. It can do like UV yeah memory and schedule. Some kind of things. Although a lot of them are bypassed, but so we also do a bunch of like tracing for workloads. We want to say the workloads is very diverse. They have different resources and behaviors. They have different requirements. For example, the first two phase is a vector database, then we have RRM decoding and LRM uh prefile, which uh some of them are like random assets, some of them are like straight-based access or sparse assess, and we have like Python training. So uh these graphs are traced via page four in the UVM driver. Uh so they need to be like over when you have oversc subscription you can have e you can easily trace the memory access patterns of page four patterns of them. and dry list figures. Uh why I want to say there's over sub question because here uh today we are facing a large memory placement and offloading problems because the QPO memory is very expensive and limited. Uh a lot of models today like MRI.

models and when you do inference you also need KV cache for transformers. This will instill a GPU memory so you want to over subsequent and put a lot of memory into GPU onto CPU and migrate them or like prefetch them between GPU and CPU. There's also some cases in Make a database or training when the access is like sparse and database is big. Data sets big, you need to put them on CPU, on CPU memory, or even like file memory, like RDMA. So when you do multi-tendance scheduling, because NVIDIA could have run Sometimes don't give you API to do like class process schedule, but sometimes you might have different kind of m tasks have different requirements running on same machine. Some is like LM inference in latency, some of them like training in throughput. Have like complete memory and compute interference. However, uh it's the same problem as the catch this 10 in the morning uh but it's it's like more because uh the user space runtime is typical. Closed source for I mean yeah uh QPU driver is the only thing cl open source here, but it still has a lot of one size feature policies. Means the policy they have like low memory, uh it's like LRUE vision and a tree-based prefecture. The scheduling is simple, like

ROM Robin and FIFO. Uh the memory place memory r L I U is ve very very slow so and also it's also a black box policy. So people typically this policy is very bad so make people want to do kernel bypassing so they manage their Memory and transfer overlap, mem mem memory placement in their frameworks is similar to DPDK. And uh because the kernel is like one size feature and we want to do extensibility to adapt to different kinds of workloads to meet different requirements. Typically, people do use-based schemes like some LDPR load approaches or maybe BPL time approaches. And or people can do some like embed some doing some logic into GPU driver because it's recently open sourced. So we have existing approaches. Some of them like uh doing list extensibility in user space runtime, like VRM, SQL, all the inference frameworks manage their own memory and scheduling. So but this memory list management is specified for each application. You cannot reuse the policy across applications. You cannot like have global control clause multi-tendance. Uh you also cannot assess like low-level driver mechanisms like replayable page force or like uh scheduling TSG configuration or firmware configuration. Uh we also sometimes have some

device profilers like VPF time, EGPO before and Ombibit and Neutrino and Kuberti, but they are designed for real-only tasks. And some people had already begun to do uh like driver modification to meet their requirements based hardcore into a driver. It has a lot of safety and deployment risk. Host EVP, you can also use like EVPF to do that, but it's limited for tracing. It's not for policies. And also GPU device, which have complex behaviors, they'll remain a black box. So our insight here is like GPU. Resource management policies need to have extensible OS interface like eBPF. We think CloudDriver is the right place because it has global visibility and control. Although a lot of things are bypassed land, they still have this very critical control and it has privileged assets. For a lot of hardware mechanism. It's transparent, so typically it doesn't need to modify application or because UVM is nearly transparent. You only need to modify one line of LAM. But host EBPF is not enough. Driver size has a lot of complexity. logic, you need to have observability into LAN. And also you cannot have some logic enforcement inside a GPU kernel. So here we also do extend eBPF to GPU device contests. So we have like one thing is like do uh

policies for UVM memory management in driver for l like uh moving data from CPU to GPU, GPU to CPU and and uh and doing some scheduling control. Uh r it's not a complete new scheduler, it's like some control with uh time slash group. It's implemented with draw aux. Another thing is like device eBPF. So we can run eBPF on GPU device with our BPF time to realize this vision. We compare eBPF to PKS and we do a bunch of binary instrumentation. We have device side hooks and helpers compare and run on GPU. And It's also necessary to connect them to ha because uh some policies require both of them. Or sometimes you need to like some hooks into driver ru driver runtime, some hooks into GPU, so you have need to have cross-layer EBPF maps. So the first part is like uh you want is tent driver policies. So I will introduce some basic concepts here. For example, the GPU schedule is uh has multiple like uh multiple abstractions. Some of them is like channels where user space could arrive. time send commands to GPU driver and then they have like scheduled growths and time slash growth inside uh GPU and they have hardware since if uh inside they have hardware since like run list for uh GPU side firmware. Uh what we can

only schedule QSG because uh CUDA runtime is largely kernel bypass. The kernel launch doesn't require uh driven driver invo invocation. So user space writes on mm ring doorbell and push the bar first and driver cannot see it. Driver can only see the TSG's lifecycle, which uh you create the uh like a hardware uh hardware queue and bind it to the run list and destroy it. But we still have some parameters we can control like time slides and interleave interleaf levels which we So, we can do priority scheduling here. And the memory is like major benefits. We can leverage the unified V shared memory, which we can transparently move memory between CPU and GPU. And they have shared VA blocks, which is Two megabytes and they have uh less visual memory, and they have trunks, which is physical memory. They have replayable portfolios, which is uh similar to which is something like page fault. So when doing page fault, So when doing page 4, the driver will first start to like try to allocate some memory on each GPU. And if there's no enough space, you will need to migrate some memory from GPU to CPU.

And you also need to do prefetch here. Be prefetch is very important because you cannot only rely on page four. Uh page four is very, very slow. And l uh so the list is managed like uh cache, so they have a life cycle of binding uh VA blocks which is virtual address. and with uh chunks. Uh so we can do uh one challenge here is like Java was not designed to expose a a programmable interface, so we need to carefully con c consider uh how can we It's pose low-level mechanisms where keep it safe. So we only desire a narrow safe interface, which is very similar to cache 10 people describe all the morning. It's just like cache idea. We treat a GPU memory as cache, and CPU. memory as some something behind cache. So uh we have like activate and assess and prepare which we can uh default agree some is LRIU. So we can build like uh LRFU, MRU, F F FIFO and based on this three. interface. Uh policies can only reorder evision list. Uh we also have a double link list evision list here. But po but uh policy can only reorder them. They cannot remove the any item from the list. So kernel will all only picks will always pick the first item.

Like item in the list, and if we can. Kernel will automatically add the drag chunks into the list so and call our callbacks in the shops. When a prefetch, so we can set a bunch of regions to uh at each page at each page for so we can uh decide what kind of page I can continue to fetch as our next step. So we can like implement some like sequential stripe-based prefetch and because we can get more information with Uh K-props, uh we can get we can have purple assess memory priority and we can have application specific contents uh put into maps to uh control uh and assess valid hooks to enable control. The default algorithm doesn't consider anything about application specific or prior And for scheduling, we uh we we do it at like uh final uh test uh TST and policy can select like sometimes and interleaf levels and you can assess or reject some test points. So uh we cannot change the algorithm rule. So but we can still have like uh priority and latency, critical or bandwise or some like bad and bandwise require uh

Differenti differentiation by process name, so PID, so we can achieve some of multi-tendant fair and use things. There there was a research paper discussed there, but they didn't use EBPF. So our proof concept was doing on the NVIDIA OpenGPO model, and Uh it has like only one hundred lines of instrumentation because a lot of things uh a lot of information we get is through K props if we are not doing like direct instrumentation. For example the PID or like research space. And so the instrumentation Is in the page for handlers and like prefetch hooks and the lifecycle management and like uh bind uh when the Victoria address is uh bind and unbind from the GPU physical address. We also have like 100 lines, 1000 lines of driver independence code. Which is uh interact with Linux eBPF to register the stops. It can be instructed as a standalone kernel module. We typically just put it inside a driver and it can be optimized. And so it's very interesting that we got A lot of speed app only specific. Even if we don't compare to UVM, we compare to the framework level of loading. UVM is much worse than a framework level of loading. So we can get like four times coding speed app and like one point.

And which is very close to the state of KBCache offloading LM cache. So it's our way we going where we can achieve speaker, I think it's like two reasons. One thing is like, one thing is how Hardware becomes much faster, especially PCIe bandwise is much faster compared to a few years ago, maybe. But software algorithms still, software algorithms become the bottleneck. They can use more algorithms, save, prefetch, and typically. Get better results. And sometimes G-based prefix does not optimal for ML workloads. So maybe you can use like stripe-based approaches. Or sequential approaches get better. And for a multiprocess, in compute-bound applications, We can use like TSP scheduling to control them. For memory-bound applications, we can use Obi-Says prefetch and evision to control them. So we can still get a lot of benefits. I've also tested on like GM, which is gravy named. network and vector database. We can also get speed up. And the second part is device side VPF. So to remind you why we need this one, because we want to have a fine-grained uh control and optionability into

Device because a lot of things remain black box when you are doing host site and host site policies. And you also want to use the device side information to improve your whole side policies, or you maybe just want to do sketch, do profiling. So the GPU execution model is SIMT model, which means same instructions execute on multiple threads at parallel and they are organized into wraps and same wraps or threads execute the same instructions at the same times and sometimes different benches will cause divergence. which uh means slow down a lot of a lot of slowdown. And it's all the scheduling is also very different on GPU. Be uh you cannot c uh uh uh before black whale you cannot have control onto a schedule, but on black whale you can have cluster lane control schedule which we'll discuss later. Later. And the scan unit is a bunch of threads instead of a single stress. And the memory is also complex. Uh it has like LO1, LO2, and BIBI HBM and CPU memory. So each thread. has different and different thread uh memory access patterns will cause very different performance uh behaviors. So for example, what we can do by offloading eBPF to GPU is that, for example, we can get how many

Which GPU thread is get scheduled on which SM? SM is like a CPU core with string processor which can uh process some GPU threads. So we can see it's uh uh very low imbalance. So we can get instruction level of observability we can get partial metrics like that, but and we can get memory assess patterns by doing binary instrumentation. We can uh sometimes we can also like have runtime adaptions uh to which is some prefetch hooks and schedu uh work styles uh shares API and this kind of information can also help host site policies to do the decision. Uh for example this is a bunch of uh attached types and maps we are currently support uh with the cluster control API before Demonstrate some of the GPU size gatherers, which we can control the at least some behaviors of GPU stress. But it's it's only a demo. So and we also can put some maps on into GPU and put a lot of help. And we you can also assess other helpers on CPU, but assess helpers and maps on CPU is very slow um because you need to assess them with PCI or other things. You need to have synchronization. So if built on BPF time, we do a new

mode and offloading uh EVPI bytecode into GPU. So BPL time is like a collection of compilers that comp here we use it mainly as a compilers because we they didn't execute things on uh CPU on your own user space. So when you when a collar application is uh starting and it can contain some FedBing which is uh binary representation and we can get the PKS from the Fedback. bins and we also uh at the same time we also compare our eBPI programs with our LVM compiler. We compare them to PKS and pull them like merge them together to do the injection and we run the kernels on GPU on GPU device and get information. It's like that. So it it's like uh manually ins insert some triple lines here. We we first we first decompile the PTS instruction into text and uh so we can easily use some paths uh or some like uh Uh relax uh to do the interpretation although it's not very stable, but it can still work. So for example, we can also let okay we can also let the whole side kernel uh eBPI program working

together with device IBPI program to capture some fun grain behaviors like when the thread uh when a GPU thread is getting s scheduled inside one kernel so it's more f it's it's more fun-grained at Cooper T because Cooper only see uh Sometimes stamps with kernel style and kernel n, but we can see the per thread blocks. And one kernel has like hundreds and thousands of threads, maybe. So we can have GPUSI props. Maybe we can try to with a better name. I'm going to try to do it drops. And we have CPUSIO props. Into a runtime to do the uh recording and like we can all set the data together. Uh we also need to do some optimization to make it faster because if I just naively put the EBF instruction into the GPU it will become very very slow. So uh Um if first thing is like t uh sometimes we don't need to have per thread eBPI programs. We only want eBPI program to run once per WAP or once per thread blocks. So we can choose a WAP leader to do the execution and like broadcast the results or just update the maps. it can reduce a lot of overhead. And but this is not only due to the execution, it's also due to like uh memory pressure because uh memory bandwise is very important on your GPU. And it's also important like where we place our maps.

If we place it on GPU, you will have PCI latency and synchronized issues. So you become like one thousand times slower in our previous version. So here we are trying to get a mass logically verified once and try to do a placement at runtime based on uh uh what kind of things is going to is is is it configuration like some host space. And this is some like numbers with some small tools you can get much faster than any big because of the optimization and like and map placement and also because of our our tool is working on the PKS level and the MVB is working on the SASS level. NVIDIA has much better optimization on the PTS level. So for a driver's side, people might ask why we were not going to this panel HS ma or DIM because less because NVGA could compute instance is completely bypassing then and uh HMM is maybe like an interface M or S bed, but it seems like all mechanism is still inside a driver. So our design is more portable. AIM also has similar features and abstractions, and we also prove the concept of

But it still needs to do a lot of engineering work to make it work on other devices. And we don't have C group support yet. Maybe we can have some later. And I'm not sure if people are going to make standard API for. Or a GPU drivers for their EBPF is transport because it's vendor-specific things. Driver is not maintained by a community. Any questions? So the the BPF on GPU side, right? Like you're saying you're injecting some PTX code or whatever. What are the limitations? Like at which point you can inject? Like if the application already started and it's using GPU, like it's it's launching CUDA kernels, can you attach your like BPF program after the process start? Or the process has to be started like with some special settings? Uh we have uh some of uh uh some people ha uh or original pro concepts like you need to do LD preload before application starting. Some people also prototypes so it can be like your Choice to inject the lib the binary instrumentation library at runtime, but it still needs to do a binary rewriting before a GPU kernel is launched on the device. So the application can be run, can be running, it doesn't need to restart, but uh you cannot inject to a running GPU kernel. Even if you can do it.

Uh you need a lot of like repo record and replay, you will have much more cost and make it hard to maintain. I I'm not sure I follow. So like you're saying, you can inject after the process starts, but it has to No, you cannot? Uh I can inject when the process is start, but uh this framework cannot inject when a ker GPU kernel is starting running on the device. Because for example, you have some persistent kernels, or maybe your kernel takes a lot of time. Okay, so in practice, how does this work? Like you you specify Something before you start the GPU using process? Like, what's the workflow here? Like, it's not clear from the slides how you actually inject the BPF onto GPU. So, the process is very similar to the original BPF time process, and you can also Do the same thing as original BPF time did. You need to run the library BPF and BPF programs with LRD preload and get some information to study on the shared memory, or you can use the kernel verifier as well. And when a process is uh study it can read from the shared memory and get a EBPF get a compiled EPPF PKX and do the injection at runtime. Or like uh the list PPF time agents can be inject at runtime. So yeah, but it still need to inject the library to the target process.

Okay. So but but it basically does similar stuff to NVBit. Is that right? Yes. Okay. Exactly. It's just we work at different assembly level. interested like uh when you inject uh the information there like uh it's good to do the process uh how do you like maintain uh across different process there uh like uh per process application A running like in the CPU side we we know which which uh process right is application A and which process is applic application B, right? Yeah. So how do you do the things in the D P O side inside, like uh that is it the same or or do do they also have the same information from the e b p f code there or? Uh You can't do have answer for that. Uh uh one approach is like we gather information with our your props and s uh store the information in our BPF maps so the applic so the GPU kernel can assess that. Yeah. In our approach, you can call some like CPUs. You can still call CPU code from your GPU kernel, but it's very super slow, right? Yeah, but so I'm starting like, besides these two operations, I'm still trying to figure out if there is any better practice. Or maybe you can inject some like, maybe.

Metadata when you are doing binary writing. So, yeah, I think it's not a technical challenge. So, one of the problems that we have with GPU workflows is that we cannot attach to a running very large-scale training workflow and do profiling, proper profiling of a kernel. To compute uh word divergence, bank conflicts and so on. So would with uh EBPF and you know me, would you be able to replay a kernel and collect multiple groups of uh profiling events? Uh c c c could you say again a little store? Oh, okay, sorry. So um basically, let's say I want to profile a kernel, right? I I want to collect a bunch of metrics that describe how the kernel is using the internal resources of the GPU. Word divergence, bank conflicts, share memory accesses, and so on. This requires multiple event groups to be collected. And currently in site compute, just replace the kernel a couple of times to be able to collect these event groups. Um would you be able to support this scenario? Because if you do, then we could actually attach to a running process and profile a production kernel instead of having to restart the job and create a Simple applications. It it would be amazing. Yeah, we are planning to support attached to a running process. Some some of them are making a proof concept. We can we are sure it's k it can work. Yeah, but yeah. I'm not sure if you are doing saying like inject to a running kernel because kernel typically uh

The CPU kernel typically is not very long. Yeah, it only has maybe you mean persistent kernel? Yeah, but the idea would be to be able to replay the kernel. And every time we replay it, you collect a set of event groups. Yeah. So that at the end of all the replays, you have a comprehensive image of how that is. kernel is executing. Yeah. So if would that be possible? I think so. Maybe we can try to make a proof concept. Thank you. Yeah. I'm definitely rooting for you guys on this one. Thank you. Yeah.
