OCP Tech Talk: M-PNP Overview and M-PNP.FPGA 0.5 Specification Deep Dive

Good morning, everybody. Thank you for joining. We will get started in a few minutes. We're just waiting for folks to join. I'm going to go ahead and start sharing my screen. And I am going to remind everybody that this is recorded. And we'd appreciate everybody stays on mute and use the hands up if you would like to ask a question. We do plan to pause a few times to take some questions at different spots in the presentation. As well as have, we hope to have plenty of time at the end to take questions as well. With that, I'm going to go ahead and start sharing my screen. Sharing the slides here. Hopefully, everybody can see that. Looks good. Okay, great. So we'll wait a few moments here for anybody to join, probably a couple minutes after. Like I said, we do have a lot of slides today. That's a lot of material to go through. But hopefully you will get a lot out of this and find it a good use of your time. So I'll pause for a couple of minutes here.

I think in about a minute or so, we'll go ahead and get started. I'll start off again and mention some of the housekeeping items. I'm Phil Leach, the Moderate Plug and Plate Workstream Chair, and we'll go through some introductions in a second here. But just reminding everyone that this is recorded. And I appreciate it if everybody mutes themselves and go ahead and use the hand up or use the chat as well. We would be happy to answer questions in the chat. If you have any questions, we do plan to pause. At a couple of strategic locations here to take any questions, as well as hopefully, we'll have plenty of time at the end to answer questions as well. So, with that, I think I'll go ahead and get started. Today, we're going to be: this is the tech talk on the modular plug and play workstream. We're going to provide a brief overview as we did have another tech talk, which covered the other specification, the FRU Discovery Boot Spec. And we spent more time talking about the overview and sort of the rationale and the Reason why we decided to create this work stream in general. But I will touch on that today. But primarily, this is a deep dive on the modular plug-and-play FPGA specification, which is part of our specifications package that we released 0.5.

Right before the OZB summit. The agenda for today, after a brief introduction, I'm going to provide sort of the problem statement and the rationale and the provide an overview and understanding of interoperability and Why we want to go move towards plug and play for MHS components, give you an overview of the modular plug and play work stream, and followed by really a deep dive into the spec. That's sort of the next set of topics there. We're going to go through each one of the IP blocks in detail so that you understand when you look at the specification, why we did certain things. Why did we specify certain IP blocks? Followed by the JSON deep dive, the self-describing JSON. We did provide a lot of detail in the previous. Tech Talk, but I will cover some of the specifics related to the FPGA, JSON. There's a few additional topics, and then finally, we'll conclude and take some questions. So, I'd like to introduce myself. I'm Phil Leach. I'm in the compute business unit as a principal technologist and architect. I work very closely with my other technologists, such as Dave Heinrich, who's on this list. And I'll go ahead and basically, Todd, if you'd like to introduce yourself, we'll just kind of go in the list here. Yeah, sure. I'm Todd Rose Dahl for Jamie.

Kind of a recent ad over there, but one of my roles is to be in charge of our DCSCM and HPM architecture. So, as such, I'm involved with this work group and trying to figure out where we go. We are an MHS shop. We make our own cloud servers. And so we. We're interested in these topics. Thanks, Todd. Jeff, would you like to introduce yourself? Yes, hello. I'm Jeff Kennedy. I'm with Dell Technologies. Within the ISG CTO, we're really responsible for strategy and forward-looking technologies and how they best intersect. We've been involved with NHS and DCSEM from the beginning. So we're excited to see it progress to the next stages. Thanks, Jeff. And then Dave's one of my coworkers. And Dave, would you like to introduce yourself? Sure. I'm Dave Heinrich. I work in our compute. Business unit. Some of my main roles is platform architecture, also BMC architecture. And so one of those roles leads to DCSCM as well. And I'm obviously working with Phil and this team on the modular plug and play effort as well. Thanks, Dave. So I just want to point out that MHS is composed of a number of member companies within the confidential license agreement. HP is one of them, as well as J-Bill and Dell. But we have plenty of representation in sort of the other key, like the silicon providers.

Intel and AMD and so on. So this is not just an OEM specific group. This is part of MHS and is one of the key work streams. Okay. So I really We're touching on why are we here? Why do we want to, why are we trying to be interoperable between MHS components? And there's a lot of words on this, but basically the idea is trying to put together these different MHS components, such as HPMs and SCMs and Others, you know, we find that that's quite challenging. If you want to be able to be interoperable, it's you know, you have to go above the electrical and mechanical layer, which is what's specified in the base specifications. So we saw that and said, well, we need to create a set of design specifications that provide the rules of the road. For how you can basically create interoperability and sort of mix and match, leverage, and reuse between different hardware and firmware on those components. So, the idea is: let's see if we could do this to improve our time to market, be able to. Combine, you know, maybe from different third parties or, you know, between OEMs, ODMs, and others, and pull together, you know, a platform using these sort of baseline components. And we see this is a big generational reuse. You've got cost and sustainability benefits. You don't

Need to reinvent the wheel each generation. You can go ahead and reuse a lot of those components. And that's going to enable greater economies of scale and allow you to use sort of a greater set of standardized frameworks, methodologies, and tools and potentially help you automate. Your entire design process. We see this has got a lot of benefits and takes the MHS, you know, the modularization to the next level, which is to the firmware level. So, you know, that's the rationale. We went into more detail on this in the previous tech talk, which was. A few weeks ago, and we are planning to get that put up on the MHS wiki for everybody to watch that if you have not seen that. I recommend you definitely do so because it provides the other half of this discussion around the. Other specifications. And it was a big, deep dive into the fruit discovery boot spec. So that's sort of at a high level, you know, why we wanted to pursue this and why we think this is really beneficial. And, you know, just to give you an example, and this is sort of the, you know, how do you? How do you create interoperability between completely different HPMs? How do you standardize the BMC discovery process? And so while we were in the sort of beginnings of this, the work stream, which was started in January of 2024.

The idea is: well, what are some of the approaches that you could do? We looked at something that was extremely prescriptive, like, let's try to standardize everything and say, you know, this I2C bus has to be used for that, maybe this other. Bus has to be used for this. These are the devices that have to be on there. And we saw that at that low level, it just wasn't practical. Everybody's got different system requirements. Configurations vary wildly. And that would really limit differentiation. So it just doesn't make sense to be that prescriptive. Well, okay, what's next? Well, now you have to have custom firmware per platform, per model. And that's kind of what we have today, which is everybody has to have a priori knowledge of that HPM. Your BMC, the firmware needs to have built-in tables, you have to have configuration. Built in. It makes it extremely challenging to design, you know, and requires a lot of effort. You end up with a lot of snowflakes. This, you know, maybe you have some commonality between a particular generation because you're using the same silicon, you know, from a particular silicon vendor, like, you know, Intel AMD or others. But, you know, it's, you know, that's really a model that doesn't create interoperability. So, okay, well, what do you do next? Well, we decided what we really needed was the hardware to describe itself. So, and that's one of the key pillars. And we talked about this extensively in the previous tech talk. We're going to talk.

about this a little bit here because it's related and intertwined with the FPGA. But the idea here is that if the hardware actually provides the BMC with a map of itself, basically here's where all the components All the buses, here's all the addresses, etc. The VMC just needs to read that and go, oh, okay, you're telling me you're self-describing your, you know, yourself, your like the HPM or other peripherals describing itself and describing the programmable logic that's on those devices as well. So the idea here is let's standardize around the methods and the data that's provided so that you can be flexible, but yet you can still use this for interoperability when you're discovering HPMs and others. So this is sort of the HPM example. And like I said, we had a lot more discussion in the previous tech talk, but in this tech talk, we'll be talking about how that happens for programmable logic, which is using a JSON file. And I'll get into this in just a sec. So, what we think, you know, modular plugins. What's the pathway to get to interoperability? How do we get from what we have today, which is plug-in code and everybody has to create their own firmware, to all the way to fully reusable HPMs and peripherals? So we see in the vision, we see, you know, we've got these set of OCP specs, all our MHS core specs, you know, HPM specs.

You know, for MPesti and XIO, MPIC, et cetera. These are the core specs that we're building on. But modular plug-and-play is the idea with that is we're going to create a set of design specifications that takes that to the next level. And so we're specifying: okay, what should be Be described by what should the HPM have? What should the FPGA for the HPM have? Well, the peripherals and all the PLDs that are associated with those peripherals or ancillary PLDs on HPMs. We're providing a set of tools. So we take that, go to the component ecosystem, and have your Your silicon vendor reference boards, HPM vendors, et cetera, ODMs can create not just HPMs, but peripherals, risers, backplanes, PDBs. You combine that with the self-describing JSON collaterals, meaning you've got a file that describes the HPM. Peripheral, the PLD, the FPGA, anything else that you need described that the BMC needs to use to ingest and then understand and be able to discover and configure those MHS components. So, as you see here, sort of the end of the row, you know, this where the system integrator would take that fully reusable HPM, those Peripherals and use the JSON files that would be consumed by the BMC, the BIOS, and anything else that would need to consume those files. And so that's sort of the idea as you get to baseline plug and play with, you know, with what we're defining within the modular plug and play work.

Stream. So that's kind of it. That's where we're heading towards. There's a lot of things in the path to get there, and we'll describe that in a second. And that's where we are today. We started off with plug-in code. That's where we are today. And we're focusing on what we're calling the interoperability framework. What that is, is a Of design specifications that we've been working on to get to something that we're calling plug-and-play light, which is kind of a halfway point. We're hopefully in the next, you know, when our initial design specifications are finished and at 1.0, and we've got potentially a set of tools and some other things that we're working on. Which I'll describe a little later. The idea is that we can get to what we're calling baseline plug and play, where you could, you know, basically put things, you put your platform together using the various components. Maybe you go ahead and use those JSON files to help you with a, you know, sort of an initial. You know, a build of your BMC, and then you have your bias and so on. And that gets you to sort of a baseline level without sort of the vanilla configuration where you're booting, you're powering on, you're booting. You don't necessarily have any of your. Or anything that's vendor-defined in there, but that's sort of what we're calling the baseline. And we allow you, and this is what sort of the interoperary realization between plug and playlight and baseline is the, you know, getting the interoper, sort of the OEM extensions, the conformance requirements, all these other, you know, getting all these tools completed, any additional supporting design space.

Specs and we do plan on having some of those as well, you know, sort of ancillary specs around the JSON schema and others. But we think you can get a lot of mileage when you get to plug-and-play late. It reduces your development lift per generation per plug-in. Platform considerably. So, you know, we're saying that, you know, hey, this is going to help everybody in the industry. And so that's why we're here to help, you know, move this along and move this forward and get your feedback. And so we really would like to get a lot of feedback on this. So that's it. Now, let me just give you a little bit more of a. Color around what plug-and-play light is. This is sort of what we call the nearer-term solution, where you could take something like an HPM, not necessarily modify the hardware, but modify any of the programmable logic on it. You might have some modified JSON collaterals, you do some additional compile-time firmware configuration. And so on, that gets you to your platform bias, you know, BMC, et cetera. And so they're not, you know, you sort of take it and modify it from a sort of an intermediary step to essentially add whatever your specifics to your programmable logic. So it's sort of sort of like a plug-in recode where it works. Sort of calling it that. And we think that even getting to this step is substantial and it provides a lot of value. So that's where we think, sort of, at the end of our initial design specs that we've been working on, we will get to that plug and play light. And then from there, we really want to see what other specs we need to create.

Create, what other things, what's missing? You know, try to get a lot of feedback from the industry to be able to build on top of what we've already created here. So that's the plug and play light in a nutshell. And we did have a bit more of a deeper dive into that in the previous. Tech Talk. So I encourage you to look at that. So, with all that, you know, sort of what is the plug and play work stream? What have we been doing for the past couple of years? So, we've been, you know, sort of the goal is to really ease the burden of system firmware development and really enable, you know, the integration of various MH. Components with the platform in a seamless way. That's what we're driving towards. And we've created a set of specifications. As you can see here, we've got three that are sort of the primary specs: an interoperability spec. That's sort of what we're calling sort of the overarching spec that provides the vision. and sort of goals and terminology. And then there's two that are what we consider the pillars, the sort of the meat of the material, the fru discovery and boot specification that provides sort of the BMC, the roadmap of how you would use the information that's been added to the fru. In the form of a self-describing JSON file, how it would use that in the discovery process, and then how you would use that for early boot. And we focus mostly on early boot. And then, and what we're talking about today is the HPM FPGA specification. And that's pretty considerable.

It's a, you know, I think it's a couple hundred-page spec. But we want to specify certain IP blocks. We want to specify really the touch points that the BMC will use when interfacing with the HPM FPGA. And each one of these IP blocks and the registers and so on, and GPIOs, that's really. Really there to be the BMC interface to the HPM FPGA, sort of provide that sort of middle layer between the actual implementation and what the BMC really does. So that's the idea. We're not prescriptive. What you have under the hood is not, you know, how you've actually implemented, that's up to you. It's what's presented to the BMC in a unified and sort of a specified manner. To support all these, we have a set of JSON schemas, some for the HPM, for the heart to describe the hardware, the FPM. That's really there to describe the different registers and what the BMC gets to interact with. And then each peripheral has its own JSON file to describe itself, as well as any programmable logic that's associated with that peripheral. We do have. In the specifications bundle, which is currently at 0.5, it's out on the MHS wiki. There's a link for that at the end of the deck here. We highly recommend you review that. The idea is we really would like to get a lot of feedback. But that contains a whole number of mock-ups.

Examples, and we do intend to build that out considerably as we go. So that's the work stream, sort of in a nutshell. I'm going to touch on each one of these specs. It's certainly, you know, the FPGA one, we're going to deep dive much further. But just to give you a little bit of an understanding, the through discovery boot spec, you know, we basically provide. The entire discovery flow. And that is what the BMC would use to discover HPM's peripherals, everything on the platform. As well, you know, and so that's facilitating, facilitated using the field replaceable unit through information in the. FRU EEPROM devices. We have an entirely new fru layout. It actually is leveraging something called DSP220 from DMTF. That's a new, it's called a FRU files format. And the intention there is that builds on top of. The existing legacy IPMI format. I don't, the previous tech talk had went into this into a lot of detail. So I recommend, if you're interested, to look at that, as well as we went into the JSON self-describing files considerably as well. I will touch on those a bit, but. Not as much so in this tech talk. And then finally, this spec does outline a few of the boot requirements, some of the early boot. We do actually intend to combine sort of and align with some of the other work streams that are out there, like the Open Boot Management Framework, OBMF.

That had started earlier this year, really to ensure that we don't reinvent the wheel or try to do something different. We want to basically work hand in hand with them. So that's kind of the boot through discovery boot spec in a nutshell. A lot more of that was covered in the other Tech Talk. The FPGA spec, this is really a high-level, just an overview. We're going to dive much deeper into this, but just to give you the flavor here, the intention is to standardize the interfaces, to provide a standardized framework that gives you a description of the IPEL. Blocks, the memory map, CSRs, what are the different virtual wires, et cetera? That's described in the JSON file. So the intention is for the BMC to read that JSON file and go, oh, now I understand everything that I need to interact with in that FPGA. Where are all the CSRs? What are the things that I, you know, what's actually implemented in? This FPGA. And the intention there is it gives you the roadmap. And we have a mechanism for how you would get that JSON file. And then, you know, the spec contains any non-functional requirements like security, you know, et cetera. We'll dive a lot deeper in this in a few minutes here. Interoperability spec, I'm just going to very Very briefly touch on this. It really is a spec that points to a lot of other specs. The intention is it gives you the outlines, the vision, the definitions, requirements, conformance, and it really references the other specs. And so it's more of a guiding light kind of a specification.

And it's actually a 0.3. We haven't really updated that one yet. We do plan on updating it when we get the other ones to 0.7. And it's more of a the glue. And really this slide kind of gives you this idea here of how these specs interact. Together. Really, you know, things like in the FPGA, the FRU discovery boot spec uses the FPGA spec for power states, CSRs, discovery. You know, the FPGA spec references the FRU discovery boot for the whole discovery process, JSON usage, and a few other things. And then finally, this interoperability spec provides that glue, you know, the common terms, definitions, vision, any high-level requirements. So that's kind of how all these specs interact. I'm going to take a brief pause here. Does anybody have any questions on everything? I've kind of opened up the fire. On everybody on this one. So I'll take a brief pause before we move on to the meat of the spec or the meat of the FPGA. All right. Yeah, and so we do plan to have plenty of time at the end to really dive into this, you know, and to provide a lot of questions, not to that me, but to give you plenty of time to ask questions. So, with that, I'm going to hand off to my colleague here, Dave, and he's going to start diving deep into the FPGA.

Spec. Thank you, Phil. So, Phil went into a lot of this, but I want to talk about the spec itself. Some of the key aspects of the spec are it builds on the existing MHS-based specs for electrical compatibility. Some of those are like DCS. SEM, MPIC, MXIO, and others. It also includes the requirements for discovery, negotiation, and initialization of the various bus types that interface to the FPGA. We're going to go through a lot of those shortly. Bill also mentioned the schema definition. So of the specific. JSON describing the FPGA. So, this is specific for like system management use. Think of BMC. How would it discover the FPGA and manage the hardware that's embedded in it? Also, it has some guidance for some non-functional stuff like security. Security and other things like that. On the right, you see just a typical system representation with a DCSCM, an HPM, and some various peripherals, as well as the interconnecting interfaces. And again, we're going to go into more details on that shortly. Next slide, please. Phil, next slide. Thank you. All right, this is just a general overview of the contents of the FPGA spec. You can see the chapters and the names of them and the description. But really, the real meat of the spec is chapter.

8 through 15. So this is just a table of contents. Next slide, please. All right, here's a list of the FPGA interfaces with the applicable specs for reference. All of these are OCP specs. On the right, you can see examples of the respective interface connectivity to the FPGA. Again, we're going to go into a lot more detail on that. I did want to kind of mention the HPM Common Circuits Type 1 spec a little bit. That's kind of an important one because for interoperability, because DCSCM defines several multifunction pins. And so the purpose of the HPM type 1 spec is to basically tie down those multifunction pins to a specific function. So that's important for interoperability. So you don't have DC SEMs that use these pins in a different manner. And yeah, you can see the two interfaces, SEM to HPM and HPM to peripheral, all of those are mentioned, all of those specs are. Available in the OCP space. Next slide, please. All right, this is just a general overview of the HPM FPGA memory map. So we have the directory on the left, which has a pointer to the specific IP blocks, CSR space.

What the size of that space is. Also, any flag indicators that might be defined. And on the right is the various IP blocks. You can see LTPI, SGPIO. We're going to go through those deep dive shortly. I wanted to comment. Chapter 9 of the FPGA spec is where you can find the details of this mapping. Next slide, please. All right, so the interfaces that are available to access the internal FPGA registers are listed here. You can see them: it's LTPI, SPY. I2C or I3C. And we've also mentioned OEM specific that's undefined. You could use other interfaces if you want, but they're not standard, so that would limit interoperability. Um and uh uh you can see a picture on the right just shows the the interfaces going to the FPGA and then you know how they would kind of map into the internal interface specific CSRs in the FPGA memory map. Okay, next slide please. All right, here's a list of the IP blocks. It shows which ones are required or optional, and you can see the description of them. One interesting thing, or I want to point out, is with respect to LTPI and SGPIO, you have

To have one or the other, or both. So you have to have one, at least one of them. You could have both if desired. Okay, next slide, please. All right, so now we're going to go into a deep dive of the power management IP block. Includes: We're going to go over the FPGA power states, power sequencing diagram, and some key CSRs that are the most interesting ones in the power management IP block. And next slide, please. All right, here's the Power states decodering. It shows the SEM states and the related FPGA power states along with their description. You can see the FPGA has intermediate power states for some of the base SEM states. So, for example, like we'll take the S0 SEM state. The FPGA has S0 SOC RAMP, S0 HoldOff, S0 Run Boot VIOS boot, and S0 RunOS. We're going to go into some more detail on those in the when we go over the power sequence diagram next. Next slide, please. Okay, I'm going to spend a little bit of time here. So I'm going to start at the top, G three. G three is basically basically you only have you don't have power supply input power. Really, the only power you have in the system is a coin cell battery for your RTC.

So, once the power supply has input power, if the DC SEM is present, that allows 12-volt standby to flow to the SEM. And so, then you enter the pre-standby state. In pre-standby, this is where the BMC will boot and it will perform HPM discovery. So, BMC will boot itself. It's going to go read the through on the HPM, which contains the self-describing information that Phil is going to go into a lot more detail later. And if the BMC likes what it's So electrically, it can decide: okay, I'm going to go ahead and enable the HPM to power on its aux rails. And so that's when you enter the standby holdoff state. And in the standby holdoff, State. The BMC, so now the HPM has some power. The FPGA on the HPM is powered up. At this point, you could decide: okay, I want to go ahead and test that FPGA and go make sure the FPGA from a security Standpoint has a valid image loaded. So, you know, you could attest that. And this is while the MPGA potentially could be held in reset. So, this is just architecture-specific stuff, but I wanted to go into a little detail on why you would want to hold off.

The FPGA from configuring itself. So let's assume that the attestation went well. The BMC likes what it sees. Then it allows the FPGA to exit its reset state and configure itself. So now you have an HPM. Got its aux rails powered. It has a functioning FPGA. And now the interfaces are alive between the DCSCM and the HPM that go to the FPGA. So now we're in the S5 Holdoff state. So in this state, This is an opportunity for the BMC to make sure, okay, I've got everything set up for my SOC to enter the S5 context. I've attested any peripherals or anything that I feel is important from a security perspective. Or authenticate. And then once all of that's done, the HPM can allow the SOC, and this is architecture-specific. Some SOCs have kind of an S5 boot context. So, you know, specifically, like I'll just throw out x86. The processors actually boot code when it is entering the S5 state. And so, you know, the goal is to make sure everything's ready. And then, if the BMC enables it, it'll take the SOC out of a reset state.

We call it kind of an S5 reset. One of the common signals is resume reset that's been used in the traditionally in x86 world. So it'll deassert that, and then the SOC will boot its S5 code or context. So at this point, You're in the S5 run state. And once you're in the S5 run state, you're just effectively waiting for a power-on request. So that could happen a couple of ways. One might press the power button, or the SOC might be configured to automatically power on. After exiting the G3 state. So once we get that power-on request from the SOC, and this is all architectural specific, we go to the S0 SOC ramp. So this is where the SOC rails and VRs are ramping up. Turning on. So at this point, once all of that, those voltage rails are up, we go to the S0 hold-off state. Okay, so what's the S0 holdoff state? S0 holdoff state is a state where I've got full power to my SLC, but I'm holding it in reset. This is an opportunity for your BMC to go attest the CPU itself. So, some architectures allow for a CPU at the station, say over one of the out-of-band buses, I2C, I3C, for example. If all of that checks out, the BMC is a very good.

EMC can enable the transition to the S0 run VIOLS boot state. Okay, so I've got power to my SOC, I'm out of reset, and now I'm booting my UEFI firmware. So in that state, it's a little complicated, but potentially. You could have some rendezvous with your BMC. So let's say there's other endpoint devices. It could be PCI Express devices, could be storage, any kind of thing that is connected to one of the high-speed I/O buses like PCI Express or CXL. That right there, you could do some authentication of those devices. Some devices require power, not only power, but to also be out of reset. And the interfaces, some of the outer band interfaces, need to be available. So that's an opportunity to do those things. Once the BMC and UEFI kind of rendezvous together, then the BIOS can continue to boot and eventually hand it off to the OS. And so this is where your S0 run OS state, you're in your OS context. And from there, you can see you could either, you know, someone unplugs the information. Put power to the power supply, you can go back to the G3 state, or if there's a system power-off event, you can go back to the S5 run state. So that's just a high level of all the power states. Wanted to provide a little flavor on the specific states and why they're interested.

Interesting. Okay, next slide, please. All right. This is just a chart showing the FPGA power states on the left and some power state or power rail and reset state information on the top. You can see that. And these are main system components: PDB, HPM, our FPGA we've been talking about, and the SOC. In this context, what red means, red means off or false, and green means on or true, and yellow is either. So I'll just take real quick the PDB. In the G3 state, you don't have 12-volt standby on, so it's red. And then once you have you're in pre-standby, you have 12-volt standby is available. And so that's green. And so you can see, I'm not going to go into A lot of detail on all of this, but this kind of gives you a flavor for these main system components and what the rails and resets are doing in the various FPGA power states. Okay, so next slide, please. Okay, these are similar diagrams. That we went through before previous slide. This is non-endpoint peripherals. So, specifically, like risers, backplanes, fan boards, for example, primary, secondary control panel, TCI express switches. These are those boards or entities that

You know, we're not talking about the PCI Express devices themselves or you know CXL device, for example. This is just the the riser itself. And that shows kind of similarly what the FPGA power state mapping to, you know. Some of the rails and the reset signals that are there. And you can see, for example, you see some of the yellow. I'll throw out an example. The S0 run boot biostate under storage backplane. There's cases. Where the BIOS likes to assert and deassert the reset signal going to those devices during, for example, training. So that's why that one's yellow. But I'm not going to spend a lot of time going through these. You can see them. And so, next state, there is. Next slide, please. All right, so this is this is, I talked about the peripherals. This is the endpoint peripherals. So this is more like your PCI device itself, like a PCI chem car, CXL device. And you can see standby power. Is on once you get to S5 holdoff. So this is the, you know, piece. This is just typical PCI card power state. So you can see that the standby reset deasserted, that gets, that happens in the S5 run state.

Main power on, that's in S0. And then reset, deasserted, it's very similar. You know, you could train those devices in the S0 run boot bio state. So you could deassert the reset or excuse me, assert the reset, deassert it during train. And obviously, you're green in the S0 run OS state. Okay, next slide, please. All right, this is, I want to talk about a couple of the important registers that are part of the fire management IP block. Is the general power control. On the right, you can see a description of what the target power state is. So, this is kind of a BMC's view of the FPGA power state. So, the BMC actually, through this register, can request. A change of state. So, if it wants to target a specific power state it wants the system to enter, it could write to this. And the behind the scenes, the FPGA will have all the signals and things that it needs to toggle or control to make those. Power sequence changes occur. Okay, and the next slide. This slide is just showing the current power state. So you have a target power state and a current power state. So obviously, you can't write to it and change it. It's going to take time for a sequencer to sequence.

To the requested state that you targeted. And so this is just more or less like a status of, you know, what is the, you know, once the power state gets selected through that previous register we discussed, then this is where it'll tell you. When it actually got there. Next slide, please. All right, so one last thing: the system control. This is another IP block, a system reset control. This block gives the BMC the ability to reset any type of I/O device that it likes. So think of all the MXIO connectors that are in a system. Each of them has a reset pin assigned to it. There might be some cases where the BMC might want to make that reset assert, maybe for isolation or recovery or other situations. But this is basically just a think of it as a logical or. VMC could toggle reset to any of the devices in the system that it chooses. And so this is just showing the plumbing out to the MXIO connectors. Also, it's not just MXIO, it could be embedded devices like OCP, Nix.

You know, OCP connectors could be embedded devices, any of the anything that you have that's a that's IO, you could have a IO device-specific reset capability. Anyway, that's it. Now I'd like to hand it over to Jeff? Do we want to pause for a second if there's any questions so far? We kind of threw out a lot of things around power management. It's one of the sort of more core pieces. It's a required IP block, as well as this system resets a required IP block. You know, those are pretty much core functions within the FPGA. you know you have to be able to have allow the bmc to control power states but yeah anybody have any questions we'll pause here for a moment before passing on to jeff and uh we do plan on having time at the end to for questions As well. So it doesn't look like anybody has any questions, either live or in chat. So, Jeff, I'll let you take over here, start talking about more of the IP blocks. Thank you, Phil and Dave. So, LTPI. This is the LVDS tunneling protocol interface. It started its definition in the DC SEM workstreams. You know, as Dave pointed out, this is really option A for accessing the FPGA memory map. It is unique to the SEM.

HPM interface or the DCSCI. It uses time division multiplex channels to do quite a bit. So it can tunnel, as you can see in the diagram here, low latency GPIOs, normal latency GPIOs, the data channels. That has access to the memory map, up to 32 I2Cs, up to four UARTs, and then there's a 2B-defined OEM channel. And when all features are utilized, it can result in significant pin savings across the DC. Interface. You may be asking why, why do we have the choice of implementing LTPI or STPIO? One of them being required, two of them may be implemented. There's a pretty big difference in terms of Of complexity of the LTPI and an SGPIO interface. You could take cost of that implementation in terms of you may need to purchase IP from your FPGA vendor. It will take up more FPGA resources. There are other options on the SEM side. So, A-Speed, for example, their 2700 family of BEMCs do support LTPI natively. SGPIO, lower resource count. It also happens to be required for the HP.

PM to PVB communication interface. So there's some overlap there. Next slide, please. So here are some categories of tunneled GPIOs across that LTPI. Bus interface. The direction here indicates from the perspective of the HPM. Won't go through all of these. Some of these are PDB to SGPIO signals, which can be sourced from the BMC or an SEM FPGA. That then get redirected out to the PDB SGPIO bus as an example. Next slide. So here are some. Here are the memory map registers as they're divided up into their various sub-regions. We have three sub-regions: the required CSRs, the optional CSRs, and optional OEM space. These would be accessed through a Number of methods, LTPI being one of them for sure. They could also be accessible via an alternate interface such as I2C. And JSON file will describe all of these mappings, where they live within the

The overall memory space. Next slide, please. So, here we're showing some required sub-regions of the LTP CSRs. The question to the greater group and the industry is. this enough space for what we see could be growing? We know the LTPI work stream is firing back up to see where it goes in the 2.0 evolution of that specification. Next slide. So here's SGPIO. Again, this is point-to-point similar to LTPI, but it's not unique to the SCI SEM to HPM interface. The MHS spec. Both the DC SEM and MPIC specs refer to this interface as required. There are some different pieces of the initiator. The initiator drives the load signal, it drives the clock, it drives the data. Out the target and drives the data in, as well as transmits a discovery portion of the payload for configuration. So let's take a look at the operations.

Phases versus some of the other phases in the next slide. So, here on the far left, we have kind of the BMC responsibilities for discovering the HPM. You know, does it have SGPIO? What do I need to do to configure the SGI? SEM. And in that middle, there's a handshake phase. And why it's divided into left and right is it depicts the HPM to SEM, SGPIO, as it's as a unique interface on the left. And on the right, it is the HPM. to PDB SGPIO channel. Now what's interesting to note here is that the HPM has both initiator and targets, and their power sequencing relative to their partner is a little bit different. In the case of the SEM to HPM, the HPM is the target, the SEM is the initiator, and the HPM is typically targeted or let out of reset after the SEM. In the case of the PDB, the PDB. Is required to provide power to the entire system. So, in this case, even though the PDB is the target, it power sequences first. So, it's important to get power sequencing and handshakes sorted out in this spec so that when

These SGPIO buses start up, they start up in a clean and safe manner, and you're not corrupting bits to be improperly consumed at either end. And then the operational phase is, you know, everything's up and running. So let's take a deeper look at the handshake phase. The next slide. And because we have these various power sequencing and different roles, the PNP spec has defined this handshake flow, which allows for a hardware-to-hardware initialization. Sequence doesn't necessitate a BMC firmware dependency. So, this could be up and running between an SCM and an HPM or an HPM and a PDB without any BMC dependency. Basically, the initiator, once it's ready to begin the handshake, it waits for a UART handshake from the target. The target starts up, maybe before or maybe after, based on sequencing. It starts to send a UART handshake, which could be very simple. It could consist of: here's my SGPIO version, which dictates bit mappings and a number of bits being transmitted and received. It does not have to be symmetrical.

Be a different number of in-and-outs, or they could be for simplicity, it's easier to have them symmetrical. And once the initiator determines that it supports that particular version, it will start to drive the clock to the target. And then once the target sees These 50 or more clock cycles, then it transitions to SGPIO mode. And just to have an additional buffer between the target being ready and the initiator starting the first cycle, we say the initiator has to wait. 100 clock cycles, which is 2x, what the target will see to be ready. And then we're in the operational phase. Next slide. So here are the CSRs to control, query status. Look at interrupts, state of the handshake, and error counters. Next slide, yeah. So here's a similar group list that we saw for LTPI. Again, the Direction is with reference to the HPM. We see PDB SGPIO signals here, which could be sourced from the SCM, right? It could go through two hops if sourced from the VNC through that.

SGPIO channel to the HPM and then from the HPM out to the PDB and back and forth. So, you know, again, this is point to point. The PNP spec will specify. base frequencies for both the UART portions and the operational phases. The spec frequency range from the DCSEM is 5 to 25 megahertz. We're likely going to choose something in between there. Have the most compatibility between system peripherals to start out. And then there are always options to speed up the interface after initial discovery and configuration. Next slide. Here's what the IP block looks like for SPY. So, this is your, you know, one of your two or three options for memory map access. The SPY internet. Interface has a decoder, an address decoder. It could wait some number of dummy cycles on a read if there were a high latency target behind it. We have a data transfer phase and

Those will access all of the different IP blocks within the memory map. As far as protocols, there are three commands that are required. The codes are 2, 3, and B is in Baker. The other ones that will operate in dual. Spy mode are optional. Next slide. So here's just what this looks like from a waveform level for a normal and Dual read. This is the example shown here: a normal read or a fast read with configurable number of dummy clocks that could be zero for normal or configurable for fast. We have a 32-bit address. And an 8-bit command. And next slide. On the right side, we're showing a dual, right, where we utilize both the SI and SO to get the same data. Across the bus in half the number of clock cycles. Looks very similar to READ with the one-byte command and a 32-bit address. I2C, I3C.

You know, very, very similar to what we saw with SPY. This has access to all of the different IP blocks within the FPGA memory map. Yeah, this is your third option. It is perhaps the slowest. On I2C, I3C reaches speeds that are comparable to SPY. But in terms of speed, this would be your slowest method of access, SPY being your one in the middle, and then LTPI being. The fastest, which up to two gigabits per second across one gigahertz clock with a DDR on LTPR. Next slide. So, yeah, again, 32-bit address, endpoint address, you know, read bytes. This is all very, very basic ITC protocol or SM bus. Next slide. And all right, I won't spend much time there. Impesty, one of my favorite topics.

Um let's yeah, so here's kind of the overview of the next few slides how we're gonna lay this out. We're gonna start with some terminology, so we're kind of all talking similar language for definitions and descriptions, and then we'll go into some of the CSRs. And discovery and virtual wire spaces and how they fit within the memory map. Next slide, please. Okay, so language. The MPestD target is the peripheral. Could be an interposer, could be Pesti embedded within a PCIe chem card. Again, quick overview: Pesti is an overloaded presence signal that enables bi-directional. Half duplex communication, very similar to a UART interface. The engine is the initiator. This is the logic that lives inside an FPGA. Now, BIMPESTI engine could reside on the HPM. It's required there to get out to your in PICs, certainly, and optionally in XIOs. Could also reside in a PDB. So imagine a PDB that sources power.

And has the ability to detect presence and tunnel wires, receive payload information from said endpoint over the single wire. Now, typically, an initiator and a target have a one-to-one. Relationship. A single Pesti wire connected to an NPIC connector, a peripheral is capable of that NPIC, and you have a single target. It is allowed, however, that eight PESTI targets could be downstream. Of a MUX per the intestine specification. So this creates some complexity. We'll show in some subsequent slides what that looks like from a block level. But the initiator block could handle. Perspec eight targets over a single wire. And the two options to do that are: one, integrate the MUX into the FPGA itself, or two, implement a MUX. Which we'll talk about more outside of the FPGA. So that MUX could be on the HPM, that external MUX could be on a PDB or some other peripheral or interposer. So you may not know as an HPM designer initially.

Where failout may occur. Excellent. So let's talk organization of the IP blocks. So an initiator IP. Block set if it supports up to eight wires using eight initiators with the ability to reach eight downstream targets per wire. At six of four times eight equals 256 pesky targets via if every wire within that group had a MUX with eight targets downstream of it. As we group initiator IP blocks, we create. Supersets of initiators, and we have some diagrams coming up. And then the MPESTI IP block is kind of the wrapper that contains all of those supersets and Individual IP block sets. Let's go to the next slide. I think you'll see some pictures here that help with the description. So here's a block. It has eight wires on the left. And then each of

Those eight wires can be one-to-one to a target, or there could be a downstream MUX as described previously on the PVB peripheral or even on the HPN itself. There's that ability, although, if it were on. HPM, you'd lean toward integrating Netbux directly into the initiator IP block. Next slide, please. And so, as we go up in organization, you can see the previous slide encapsulated on the left here, but now There are a number of them. And as we collect groups of IP blocks, they become a superset block. And those superset blocks, we can have a number of those as well. The number of possible targets attached to a single HPM FPGA grows quite fast. So, how do we deal with that? Next slide, please. Well, first, we have CSRs. We have global registers that affect. The entire impested block. Next, we have control and status registers that are on a per target basis. Again, those could be up to eight.

Downstream targets per eight initiators within a block. We've allocated 128 bytes per target window of discoverable payload that can be transmitted from. The target to the initiator. We have a number of registers that support virtual wires in and out. BMC firmware can write to these registers to manipulate the virtual wires that are tunneled over Pesti from. HPM initiator to target, and I also can read the status of those coming back from the target to the HPM. We've left opportunities for growth and extensibility, build your own OEM sections and target optional. Sets within the register space. Next slide. Okay, so drilling in on some of the per-target spaces, you know, these are the registers that are defined within the MPESTI specification, the discovery state. Status, the discovery payload enable, the active phase enable. And I'll note here that there is an association to the FlexIO control pins that we'll talk about in a little bit. In particular, the power on.

Allow bits. Typically, BMC firmware would query the through or the discovery payload, determine what the target is. Does that target require power during S5 or S0 only? And so BMC. Would be responsible for configuring the FlexIO bits for the power enable to track various system power states, S0 or S5, or not at all, right? It could be that it found a device that it doesn't yet support. Works. That wouldn't be where we want to be with true plug-and-play, but we may come across those scenarios where BMC firmware will not allow a device to be powered for either unknown or asecurity. Risk has been identified. Next one. The IP target discovery payload space. Really, there are two different methods. Of course, the flat Space on the left for every possible thin pesty target, we allocate 128 bytes to each target. Again, with the n times n initiators times downstream targets of a mux, that's sticking up a bit of.

Space within the FPGA. The alternate is what we're calling a destructive fixed size in Pesky payload space. This is probably most useful when there is a mux and multiple downstream devices coming into. An HPM initiator, you can imagine being under VMC firmware control, you're allowing each device of that downstream MUX to be discovered serially. And each time you consume a payload and are ready to request the next one, The previous payload will be overwritten by the incoming payload. This conserves overall HPM memory, which may be restricted to block RAMs or what have you. And next slide Virtual Airs. So yeah. One of the benefits of MPesty is you can tunnel virtual wires in and out of a target. And so these registers are required to support that.

FlexIO. So MXIO and MPEC specs define that multiple behaviors are configurable by a combination of BMC and HP and FPGA. Capabilities to determine what behavior a particular signal may have between the HPM and peripheral. This is because there are a limited number of signals on the MPAC and MXIO. Interfaces. If an HPM FPGA were to support every possible FlexIO to every possible connector, there would be a lot of pins required on the FPGA. Electrical specs in some basic functionality are determined by MHS-based specifications, the MPNP. Of course, it goes a step further. We have memory-mapped offsets that are determined and discoverable. JSON. We have peripheral interforce interposer device class definitions to help with the configuration of various websito behaviors to the peripherals. And these are required to support the peripheral interconnections.

Via MXIO and PIC power connectors. Next slide, please. So, this is what a block diagram looks like at the internals of the HPM. FPGA CPLD, you can see that there's essentially a MUX. The configuration registers will select which signal, internal signal from the FPGA will get routed to that particular XIO. We'll have standard GPIO and alt function configuration options. And with a few of our device classes, we will make it easier to configure these by Limiting the possibilities of what signals can go on to what FlexIO. Next slide. So here you can see where we're starting to restrict things a little bit to. Make things more manageable. You can see the HPM must support column and which default alt assignment that FlexIO is on. So, for example, wake and power break to required significant.

Are on Flex IO2A. And as you can, you know, on the PIC power, we have a single, I'm sorry, we have a, well, it is a single wire, but the way the pick power is Are divided into channel A and channel B. You can see that both the Prez B slash PESTI and Prez A slash pesti are required. All the others are optional. CSRs for controlling those, the global registers, the four bytes per FlexIO for essentially selecting which input of the MOX is going to get steered to that. Particular FlexIO. We have the MXIO and NPIX all here. And this is where the power on allow would be configured in the PIC powers. MUXs. MUXs are interesting. They're a necessary evil, unfortunately. Or fortunately.

The idea here is that we're requiring a GPIO MUX with an enable. And I'll go through three good reasons why we're selecting a GPIO control MUX versus an address. MUX, first of all, we want to be able to enable and disable MUXs. We could have nested MUXs. We could have a MUX downstream of another MUX. Some of these I2Cs could be cable to peripherals and have very long. Segments. We'll probably have 50 or more I2C segments on a given HPM. So, signal integrity and the ability to isolate MUXs and select individual downstream channels one at a time. You know, really helps that. We want to go as fast as we can. We want to push the boundaries of I2C up to 400 kilohertz. So, enables and individual channel-only selections are preferred. Addressable MUX has addressable MUXs have that. Feature that you can select multiple downstream channels at a time. You know, this is sometimes desirable, so I would say we need to approach that with caution. There may be uses for addressable MUXs on an HPM design.

But in general, we would advise not using them. For one thing, PCIe ChemSpec does not provide guardrails on any addressable MUX on a add-in card. That address could conflict with an addressable MUX if it were upstream of the PCIe chem card. And then, you know, because it's addressable and they have the same address potentially, it would be impossible to affect one MUX selection without the. Other. There's also a security concern with addressable muxes. Addressable MUXs don't distinguish where the initiator traffic is coming from. So if you could picture a PCIe camp car. That was a bad actor, it could drive the IQC bus and enable all of the channels in that box. So it could. Potentially talk to every downstream target that's attached to that mux. And we generally view that as not a good thing. Besides ITC, of course, you know, muxes control UARTs, SPY.

Buses, JTAG buses, and others. And I'll pause there. It does look like we have a question in the chat. I think we have a moment. Can address that really quickly here. So the question is from JBK. It says, MPSD overloads the presence signal, correct? So it doesn't have a physical pin association only for it. Rather, all the communication initiation described here is logical over-presence. That's correct. So, yeah, so MPesty supports a static present signal. So, if a target is statically holding that cable presence, presence, or PESTI wire low, it just looks like something is there. There, but no communication will be attempted by the initiator unless it sees a rising edge of that wire. That's the very first step of the discovery protocol for MPESI: the initiator sees a rising edge, observing that. There is a target that is present, but it's requesting communication. And then there are the various discovery and active phases that can be skipped or disabled based on the CSRs.

Thanks for question. Yeah, we have another question here from Alexander. Yeah, so it's Alexander Johnish from AMD here. Just two notes, Jeff, I think you said that LTP. Supports up to 32 ISPCs. It default supports up to six. I don't know if that was something I misunderstood or okay. Yeah, the I mean, there are six bits for select. I2C channels to be tunneled. And the LTPI spec diagram shows 12 of them. So I would say that's six. I think there are three bytes dedicated to. I squared C and each file supports up to two I squared C. So it six of it. Well, never mind, it's an LPPI spec, so it's there. The other thing is just to note what you said, it's two gigabits per second. Is LTPI maximum rate, so LBBS and that's maximum rate for LTPI? It's not all used for data channel in case that you're using it for accessing data. So

In most cases, you get the IO tunnel through as well, but I agree it's probably the fastest of all these three methods. I have just one other thing I was talking to to Doc Kim Dior Dea. I mentioned that if the MPST spec states that we can have sixty four uh kind of targets and uh and eight uh it could be muxed up to eight on each one of those. Uh that's five hundred twelve, not two five six. That's the typo in the In the spec, but the question I have is: what's the point of having the IP block versus IP block set? Can we just not define maximum? Number of initiators, and then each one would have up to eight targets if they're using MUX or if they could have one up to eight each. Right, yeah, the MPAS-C stack, the base stack does not. Put limits on the number of PESPI wires per initiator. So, for practical purposes, the PNP spec is placing limits on that. Okay. So, it's a PNP choice to limit the number of.

Pesti wires to eight per initiator block, which could be up to 64 targets if each of those eight wires had eight downstream channels. A MUX. So actually, I'll put in the chat here: HPE recently contributed an MPSD-based MUX that is architected using an FPGA, whereas the MPSD specification. Examples utilize an MCU plus a hard switch or MOOCs. Using an FPGA has a lot of advantages that HPE folks did a good job of documenting the problem statement and solutions. that it provides. In the chat, I put that link to their white paper. If you want to take a look at that. All right. Thanks for that. Interest of time, we're gonna move on. So Todd, oh, thanks, Jeff. We're gonna pass it on to Todd to finish up. Last of the IP blocks here. All right. Thank you guys. Yeah, I'm going to be talking about some potential things we could add to the FPGA. I'm going to talk about LEDs and cooling, fan control, and then telemetry. So let's start with LEDs, which, you know, traditionally

Actually, it's one of the simplest things, turning on a fault LED, but it's one of the most complicated things to actually get right. When that fault goes away, you have multiple controllers, maybe the BMC and the HPM both are involved in setting and clearing the LED. So it's really complicated, despite the fact that it seems so simple. So, what we're looking at potentially doing here is moving some of this, some of the LED control into the FPGA, and hopefully to help with this and to simplify things. So, you might have just an LED that just needs to be lit, and there are control registers inside the control block, and the BMC. Would just go in and set the control register and say, well, here, I want you to blank it. I want you to turn it on solid, whatever. It just directly does that on the HPM. Now, you might have an HPM, the HPM as well, needs to maybe control that LED. So there's complications here that would need to be worked out, but one option is this. Direct LED, you know, direct LE control, or the LED might be on some other peripheral, right? It might be on a PCIe card, and both the, you know, the host might detect that there's a problem as well as the VMC. And again, you would need some sort of a state machine here. Then you don't want the VMC to have to talk the protocol. To the PCIe card, right? You really want that to be inside that FPGA, and the BMC just comes in and says, hey, set this LED or blink it or whatever into the state machine, and then it's handled by the FPGA. That offloads the control and the need for the BMC to understand how to talk to that particular LED.

And again, all of these things would be defined in this in the files that Phil talked about at the beginning. If we implemented something like this, the BMC would read a file and understand: well, here's the LED, and here's how I control it. Another aspect is the panel, the seven-segment display. The BMC might want to put something on the display, also the. The HPM, the OS, others might want to control that display. So here you could have some knowledge and some logic inside that FPGA to help with that. And the BMC would say what it wants to display, and then others might as well. And then you determine what actually gets put up. There's many things we could do here. Hopefully, this would help with the complications. But what we're really looking for on this one is: is this worth going after? And if so, in which of these, one or all of them? We don't really want to define a bunch of things in the spec that aren't going to be used. So, we're looking for feedback. From all of you folks on the call to say, is this an interesting use case for the FPGA IP? Now, everybody don't talk at once. I mean, so how are we getting the feedback for? Did we decide they will send it to you if they have? Yeah, there's a slide at the end. We'll talk about that. Yeah, interest of time, we'll just try to cut it. We'll get feedback at the end. All right, we have some extra time for sounds. Go ahead. All right, keep going then. All right, so cooling control.

Traditionally, this would be done. Usually, the BMC would have control of the fans, right? It would collect temperatures from HPM in various places and then it would control the fans. That, you know, the question is: should we offload that to the HPM, not have that burden on the BMC? So then you could have the HPM. Have direct control of the fans. There could be, you know, it could certainly be a chat. Certainly could be a more complicated fan control. The FPGA could do a basic fan control based on its temperatures. And what I like about that is, you know, then it is really all control. On that HPM with maybe some override from the BMC. The BMC comes in and says, Well, the BMC sees other things that the HPM doesn't. So it might say, No, I need more. Some of my other components are hot, HBM. So you're doing a good job keeping yourself cool, but needs to be some override. There's many, many considerations. Considerations here. Let's go to the next page and talk about it a little more in detail. All right, so we could have sort of direct control, you know, this cooling IP block where, yeah, this is how it's sometimes done, right? The VMC would read tax, you know, tax signals, output PWM, no fair, no. The fan presence. Well, here you can move that inside the FPGA and the and the BMC, and it could do it. And the initial fan control. And again, the BMC could come in and set some registers to say, hey, I need more. I need more RPM because sometimes.

I see are getting hot. There could be a more advanced fan control where now that it's just the FPGA is talking ITC to a fan controller. DLC is similar, right? Maybe it's where it's talking out, saying, here's the RPM that I need. It's telling some sort of a fan. A fan controller out there. So you could have these IP blocks inside the FPGA. Again, it's doing, it's asserting the fan control based on what it sees. And again, the VMC would be able to come in using the CSRs and say, hey, I need more RPM, or here's the TAC I want, or however you would want to do it. Again, looking for feedback. Do we try to think about moving some of this onto the FPGA? That's really what we're looking for. And if so, how would we just do one of these methods? Again, don't really want to do all of them if no one's going to use one or the other. So that's the question here. All right, telemetry. This one I think is a great idea, actually. So, here, you know, today the BMC is going out and it's talking to a bunch of different components on the HPM generally, talking to getting power status, getting temperatures, and it has to understand. What the temperatures, you know, how do you talk? How do you get the temperature from an Intel versus an AMD processor? It needs to know that. Well, if you offloaded that to the HPM and have the FPGA understand that, so then the HPM vendor encodes into the FPGA how to get all these temperature sensors. So it's reading all of these, all the temps and it's

I'm giving that to the BMC in some sort of a pre-packaged format that we would define. And therefore, the BMC just asks the HPM: hey, what are all my temperatures? And so the HPM can get temperatures from remote peripherals and everything that it can see. And then the BMC would, of course, get its own temperatures from other things as well. But here you offload all that temperature. Collection to this FPGA. And again, I think that would some of these BMCs out there are running out of gas in certain instances when they have a lot of things to read and manage and control. So this would be a way to offload those BMCs next page. Here's what this would, you know, potentially. Potentially look like again, this telemetry IP block is going out over I2C or whatever, whatever vendor-defined interface, grabbing those temperatures that would have to define what these temperatures look like, what are they on, how often are they read, and it's not just temperatures, powers. Anything and then send that back to the BMC. And the BMC would just, in that configuration file, understand, be told by the HBM what it's going to collect. We would also potentially want the BMC to have input in there and say, hey, that's great that you're giving me the temperatures every so often and fan speeds every so often, but I need more. Because I have a fancier algorithm that I'm using on the BMC because I have the control of the fans, you know, if we say they still have good fan control. So we need to have these, you know, the CSRs defined so the BMC can give input as well. And also, of course, the format of what the data is going to look like. All right, next page.

And then this is like future-proofing our system, right? Like, whatever might be out there, is there a GPIO that the FPGA has access to, and we would want to describe in some way to the BMC what this is and what it does, and then have the BMC be able to. Provide, you know, provide input and say, yeah, you know, I want you to read this, or I want you to set this GPIO now or in whatever situation it might want it set. So this is more general GPIO usage. And do we want to come up with some ways to define that, define those CSRs? And then be able to implement vendor-specific types of GPIO control. That's it for me, I think. It is. Yes. So thanks, Todd, for all of that. So, interest of time, I'm just going to gloss over this. And really, I'm not going. Going to cover this today. This was covered in the through discovery boot, in the other tech talk. This is described, this flow is actually described in that specification, and it does give you sort of the correlation to the power. States. So I recommend everybody look at that. But I'm not going to cover this today. Just to interest of time here. Really, what are the things that the FPGA, you know, how is it involved in the discovery process? It is actually critical. You know, we Dave went through the power management, all the power states.

You know, that's absolutely pretty much a cornerstone to the discovery process because, as he mentioned, sort of at each power state, there's these hold-off states that allow the BMC to keep some things and reset so he can go ahead and perform any security-related functions, you know, SPDM or anything else, attestation, authentication. Et cetera. The reset control, that's critical as well. That's part of that whole process. LTPI, SGPO tunneling. There's a set of required GPIOs that need to be tunneled. That's described in the spec. There's essentially, you know, the Access to the memory map that's that's required. So you can do things like I2C MUX control. You can control the FlexIO and PICPower sidebank for their configuration to enable the peripheral discovery process. I2C MUXs on those isolated I2C buses through to PICPower. And then finally, Finally, and this is, you know, and it was talked about, and we had a few questions here about this. You know, the MPesty IP block also contains the cable presence. So that's just to know if something's plugged in. You need that, that's why that IP block is absolutely required. Even if you don't. Use full-blown PESTI, just simple PESTI. You still see that in that IP block in those registers. And then, you know, finally, any discovery payload, virtual wire support. So, this is how the FPGA has used it in the discovery process. And it's outlined in the discovery boot, you know, through discovery boot spec.

But it's also referenced into the FPGA spec as well. So I know we don't have too much time today. I'm going to talk a bit about the self-described JSON file. We did spend a lot of time on that in the previous tech talk. So I'm going to just sort of. Give you the highlights here, but it's pretty much necessary for the BMC to understand: okay, what does the FPGA have? What does it support? What are the features? What are all the GPIOs that you're sending over LTPI or SGPIO? That's the information that you're going to find in that file. And essentially, it's. And here's the thing that, you know, what we're looking at doing is extending the FPGA spec to also include any programmable logic devices, whether they exist on the HPM or on the peripherals. So we're going to have some, you know, we're looking to expand the spec further. And this is part of what we're adding into the 0.7. So, look for that, but we do want to make sure that we capture a lot of input from the industry so that you know we basically want to make sure we're on the right path on this because one of the main things we haven't added in the spec are sort of the error path, sad paths, and that's something we're going to be looking at adding into the 0.7. We want to make sure we're on the right. Track here with the spec. JSON file. So we just don't have enough time. So one of the things I'm going to suggest at the end is if people are really interested in all the, you know, what are all the different attributes, the gory details, every single, you know, one of those, what do they mean and why? We probably would have a

Another tech talk, couple hour tech talk, maybe after the first of the year, sometime, if we think there's enough interest. But the idea here is: this is kind of a little high-level, you know, which shows you the sections. If you look at the FPGA JSON pile, you see there's a, you know, a C of version, an author, copyright. Well, the general section contains some general information like when it was built, who built it, et cetera, some versioning. IP blocks that gives you a set of basically what are the different IP blocks that you've implemented in this FPGA. You do need to have the required ones, like power. You know, power management and so on, but that's that's going to say, well, I maybe have the cooling or the, you know, the, the, the thermal, you know, the telemetry collection and things like that. So, so that's going to be in that IP blocks list. The memory map gives you pretty self-descriptive memory. It's an app that memory, but it does have these different sections. That you know, of each, you know, that reference each IP block. So you might have a region that says, this is the power management region, this is the LTPI, this is SGPIO, et cetera. And actually, what we've done is we've referenced, we put pointers there to register. So, we can reuse register definitions. One of the things we wanted to do is try to not to make this as, you know, we try to reduce the size of this as much as possible. So, you know, because even when it's zipped, it's a JSON file, isn't necessarily the most compact, not like something that's like a C struct.

It's binary packed. But we wanted something that just about every BMC should be able to read JSON. I mean, you have redfish. We tried to pattern this after redfish. So the intention here is to use something that's easy for humans and then for machines to manipulate. Accordingly. So that was the reason why we chose JSON. And so you can see here, there's a physical signals, gives you the actual pins. And virtual wire is, and virtual wire here, it's the virtual wire that's internal to the FPGA. And I've got a slide that talks to this. What this allows you to do is to map an internal signal to something that's external, like a physical signal, a register, or something that's a tunnel GPIO. Then finally, buses is the bus list. And you might have I2C connected, SGPIO, et cetera. JTAG, that shows up in the bus list. All right, so I'm just not going to have time to dig into this, but you know, again, there's a mock-up and a schema that are both in the 0.5 package. I recommend everybody look at that. And if there's enough interest, we'll. Have a couple hour tech talk that just talks about the HP. Well, we cover the HPM JSON as well as the FPGA JSON and peripherals, and we go into a lot of detail there. I mentioned the virtual wire mapping. So, this is a framework that we basically put this together so that we could within the JSON.

File, you can understand which internal wire is connected to the bus GPIO, the CSR and the memory map, a physical signal, and how it's mapped to an IP block. So, this gives you that sort of free. To give you the connection so that you can say, okay, I understand that this bit and the CSR, well, that's also being tunneled out through LTPI, GPIO, or this also is connected to a physical signal and is used by a particular IP block, or is an output from an IP block. So this framework is described in the spec. And if I would have had more time, then I'd probably go through into more detail on this. But it's described in the spec. And again, if people are interested, we can have another tech talk that goes into detail on this. So I'm not going to cover this. Basically, we have OEM sections that can be. It's both in the HPM, you know, JSON as well as OEM sections in the FPGA JSON. If you want to have something that's unique, you can create an OEM structure for whatever reason. But we allow extensibility. I do want to take a moment to talk about how do you get. We've been talking about the JSON file. Well, there's a couple different ways. So, you did see earlier that there's a directory location that you can get the compressed JSON file accessible via the memory map interfaces. That's one way to do it. Another is, and this is probably one of the more likely.

Things is it's going to be attached to the FPGA image as an addendum file that sort of, you know, so if you collect it through your image verification, maybe you have a you use a direct access bus like JTAG, you read the image, and at the end of the image is the JSON file that's compressed along with any signatures. That's associated with that file that would be provided there as well. And then, you know, as if you would have gotten that FPGA image, likely you would have gotten pulled it down and flashed it at some point. Well, the image file could be stored by the BMC and NVRAM, and it just basically uses. If it's already got it, then why get it again? I mean, also, you know, there's other mechanisms like the bias firmware volume. It could be, you know, included as part of a, you know, in the bias image, be packed in a firmware volume. We also have another. And this is a patch system and it's described in the spec. We don't have time to talk about it today. I think I also included it as a backup slide. But the idea is there is you can put a sort of the initial through, the initial FPGA JSON file in the HPM through in that EPA. Prom. And then the only thing you need to do is provide patches for that as you update that FPGA. And that's described in the spec as well as I think I have a backup slide that covers it. But a little bit around security guidance. So we do require a signature. Along

With a JSON file, it could be just basically covered as part of the full FPGA image signature, and it just signs the whole, you know, the image plus the JSON file. You know, it gives you a little bit of, you know, guidance here around SHA-384 for the hash. Use an industry standard algorithm. I know that's kind of vague. But we're still in the security is one of the areas that we're trying to get input from the industry to see what additional things we need to add in there. And then finally, we do VM support, but it's optional, and we don't even require. Specific bus. I2C is pretty common for MCTP, sort of SPDM over MCTP, but we don't require a specific bus. We do require that there's a digital signature. You got to have one, but it doesn't have to be packaged for the image. You could leverage the same one that would be in the HPM through. And that's the certificates and the HPM through is described in the other tech talk. And I'm kind of trying to run through this really quickly so we can get to questions. One of the things that we're looking at doing, and we've already started it, is a file creation tool for the JSON file. You know, this is a. We're calling FPGA to JSON. The idea is it automates the process of getting that FPGA JSON file from sort of a requirements template through to an initial requirements JSON that then you would input into this builder tool as well as.

Your image and your potentially parsed RTL file, other things that you would have as a JSON file that would go into this builder tool to create the final FPGA JSON file. This is a work in progress. We're hoping some sort of an open source. Release in Q1 of 26 to coincide with a 0.7 spec package, but that's still TBD. There's a lot to do there. And this slide kind of shows that we would love to have a 0.7 release sometime in Q1 of next year. And then maybe even a 0.9 before. For the 2026 EMAA summit. That's, you know, the 0.9 is if needed, we may decide that we don't need it. But I suspect we're going to be getting a lot of industry speedback over the course of the next six months or so. And so that may change some of our direction. So that may precipitate a 0.9. And then finally, the 1.0, we do target that by the, you know, next before OCP summit of 2026. And, you know, sometime in the summer, maybe, you know, Q3, that's the goal. So that's the schedule. Scheduled, aspirational, of course. We do have a lot of future work. There's lots of things on IP blocks that we need to do. There's sort of folding, the telemetry cooling, want to get the feedback on those IP blocks. And finally, the peripheral PLDs, we do want to fold that in. And then, you know, any

Anything around JSON mock-ups, additional changes there. And we can't stress this enough was we really would like your feedback for that so that when we have the 0.7 spec, we've incorporated industry feedback as well as gotten the sort of the error pass, SAD pass, and anything. Else that we need to get in place as well as finalizing things. So, this is our call to action. Please review the 0.5 spec. There's a lot of collaterals out there. This is the link for that. You can provide the feedback through MHS project or SEM subproject. You know, there's basically, you know, you can get involved in the work streams, you know, if you're a member, you know, CLA, you know, member company of SCM or MHS. But if you're not a member, you can, you can attend the public meetings. You know, please, you know, the MHS public meetings. Meetings, you can through the public mailing list. This is where we're collecting any, you know, any feedback because that's the MHS public. We don't have a public for plug and play because they're not 1.0. You know, we have floated the idea if there's enough interest, maybe we can have a public meeting once a month. But maybe that's something we would do after the 0.7, unless there's a lot of interest, and then we'll see what everybody has to say. So, this is the, I think we've got like four minutes for questions, and I think there was, was there an additional question here? Yeah, I think there was.

So it looks like Justin says standardizing the methods looks like a good idea. Okay, thank you so much for that feedback. We got probably four minutes or less for questions. And with the slides being available on the recorded video, we are still working on getting the Previous meeting. We've got the, you know, we're trying to get the recording up and a share. You know, so we're going to be working on getting both of these on through the likely through the MHS public wiki as well as the slides. And so we're still working through that. I'm hoping that we'll have some. Something by the end of the week. But yeah, we do want to get those up and available for everybody. And we'll announce that once it's up on the public wiki, we'll announce it through the public reflector that it's available in the MHS and probably would do that on server as well: just say, hey, these are available. Available, but look for that. We'll try to get that done this week. So, any other questions? I know I kind of raced through this final set of topics. And again, if people are interested in the JSON, we could do a deep dive there. Yeah, just a thank you to Alexander, I believe, for pointing out my mistaken information regarding I2C channels and UART channels supported by the LTPI interface. It is six I2Cs and two UARTs. Fortunately, that data is not.

In the slides, there's no corrections to be made there, but I will correct my notes so I translate that information correctly in the future. Thank you. I'll pause for another minute or so, and then, you know, but we do thank everybody for their time and really appreciate it. Appreciate attending and providing feedback. And again, if you have questions that you think of later, please send it to us. You can send it, we've got our emails here. You can send it directly, but also happy to have it over through the public reflector as well. And I'll just pull this back here. Public reflector, the main. us OCP MHS public at OCP dash all groups IO. So yeah, it's uh I'll just type it in here. There you go. Yeah. So again, thanks, thanking everybody. And looking forward to any questions folks might have or any feedback, positive, negative, doesn't matter. We're happy to.

Get all feedbacks, great feedback on this. So, yeah. And anything else anybody have to add? Otherwise, we can wrap it up. Here, I'll stop sharing. Thank you, Phil, for drawing. Yeah, thanks. Thank you, Jeff, and Dave and Todd for participating as speakers. And thank you so much. Thank you. Help me to talk again next time when we have another Tech Talk. Thanks, everybody. Thanks. Bye.
