Turning PCIe Hints into Cache Hits: Enabling Smart Data Cache Injection in Linux - Wei Huang

All right, it's me again. You have to stick with me for another 15 minutes. All right. This one is actually a little bit different. This one already in the kernel. But it's kind of interesting. So it's about the TPH support in the PCIe. It got accepted, I think. A lot of people think, well, it's part of this standard, and that's one of the main reasons. But we want to show you some good performance numbers in this presentation and ask for maybe you, as device driver developer, or some endpoint device vendor, may consider use that. Vendor specific, so it's kind of vendor neutral. So it will be interesting to see. And so the first thing is about this new technology is PCIe TPH actually. And we call it AMD SDCI. So we leverage this uh SDCI uh using the uh TPH to allow the uh smart data cache injection. And I'm going to cover a little bit b about the uh kernel integration and the uh the show you some performance benefit as well. So uh about the uh the purpose of this uh design, right? So we cache injection is not new. There are other vendors already did it. But they all they use the last level cache data injection. And with the chip led design and more complex SOC layout, we need more flexibility for the

be able to handle the uh complex uh cache design. And also we want to allow the uh device driver to cherry pick what kind of traffic they want to do the injection, not kind of dictated by the uh uh vendor's uh uh cach the uh injection policy. And we also want to make it to be flexible. Um So this comes with the this SDCI. So the AMD SDCI is well stands for the smart data cache injection. And what it does basically very simple is when the traffic DMA write traffic coming in, we will try to Put the data to the L2 cache that's closer to the consumer of that data. So all the inbound DMA traffic will be injected to L2 cache based certain policy. And what you need is basically we need a TPS support for the obviously the endpoint device. And that's standard, right? So it's relatively easy. And endpoint driver and endpoint firmware, so a lot of them need to kind of decide: hey, I have this capability, I want to, how I should use. That and be able to get my traffic into the L2. So the bottom here is a TLP header, right? If the TLP THBID is one, then the traffic going through the IODI and the AMDSOC will be considered for the LP.

Cash placement. There are a complete kind of complex cash policy placement, a cash placement policy for SDCI. But you can kind of get an idea from this diagram. I'm not going to elaborate the details. There's a lot of probing to find all your check audio cache cache line and location and so on. So the software component here is very simple. So the first one is the files need to provide DSM. This is ACPI DSM. CSM developed by between AMD and ARM. I believe, yeah, it was ARM. What it does is providing a mechanism for the OS or the driver to query that: hey, I have a CPU ID, I want to inject the cache. Could you tell me what's the CPU? Steering tag value. So that steering tag value is vendor specific. And the second layer, Linux obviously needs to do all the TPH configuration and so on. And then the device driver itself decided what they need to inject, what kind of traffic they need to inject. Very simple. So the API itself is fairly straightforward. They are the PCI subsystem, the core API. You do the enable TPH and disable TPH depending on driver's need.

And uh there are two main functions uh that is to get CPU ST value. So that one allows the driver to query that DSM to retrieve the uh ST value. And the second function is to set the uh S T and the S, the S, the S, the So this function will automatically check the location of the steering table, which could be located either in the MSIX entry or could be in the TPS extended capability space. And then after that, that's all. Everything we need. So, from that perspective, we get this support in Linux kernel and 613 already. So, if you guys are interested, you can take a look at it. There are different modes supported, like as no ST mode and PCI TPH, the vendor Vendor-specific mode, and so on. So it's all in the details. So I'm going to skip this one quickly. So about the performance. So when we, as I say, when we submit this patch set, we didn't. Disclose any performance. And this one actually is a collaboration between AMD and Broadcom. We use our Broadcom P2100, 100 GIG NIC, and set up with iPerf, and it's based on their AMD.

And Zen5 processor and so on. So we have two different setup. One is a one queue on the right-hand side, and then the other one is a four queue iperf setup. So this is, and the performance number, as you can see, actually, Is pretty significant. Now, you okay. I need to point out that we didn't show you the IPERF performance improvement. The reason is with current CPU and everything, it's easy to get a line rate 100, 200 gig. Or 400 gig. So there is no way I can show you that the performance improvement like in terms of the network traffic bandwidth. But I show you here that we can save the memory bandwidth by using the SDCI. So the for your one queue case you can see that a lot of mem traffic actually is coming both rewrite we can improve significantly for the total memory bandwidth in the one queue setup. We can improve by like 70% reduced. And for the 4Q case, it's over 50%. So that kind of shows you the memory bandwidth benefit by doing SDCI on.

And another performance study is about: hey, we show the memory bandwidth saving, but where the bandwidth is saving from. So using MD performance counter internally, we're kind of trying to see where that data comes from. And the same thing here, the diagram shows one Q and 4Q. Setup, as you can see, that a majority of the data now come from cache. It could be a local L2 or could be across ZCX. But you can see that the memory traffic actually is reduced significantly for both 1Q and 4QK. Okay. So this kind of proved that we by using SDCI cache L2 cache placement, so we can get the data closer to where the consumer is. Okay. So another one is about the Latency. So we this one we use the AMD Xilinx solar flare NICA. This is a fintech kind of focus network car. And in this case, we do the SDCI on and off. And as you can see, that for all the different payloads. Sizes for both like traffic TCP UDP, we will be able to consistently improve the network latency using this network car by turning on the SDCI. So, this kind of showcases the latency benefit.

Okay, so yeah, about this talk, I think the main thing is about the collaboration. So, the current status for SDCI support, as I say, 613, we have that patch included in a tree. BNXT driver support for STCI is included in 6.15. And recently another AMAD engineer get the QoS support into 618. So pretty much we have all the PCs in place. If you're interested, you can take a look at that. And I'm working on the virtualization support for TPH. Basically, when you do device pass-through for TPH-capable device, I want to be able to do update the steering tag in the steering tag table entry. For the community, Collaboration. I think the first thing is for other vendors, as I said, this is not AMD specific. The DSM is the ACPI DSM is open standard, so you can plug in whatever value you feel is right. So you Can enable that and maybe be able to leverage the same SDCS TPS support in Linux. And secondly, the device driver can consider that for a lot of IO write intensive workload drivers, you can use SDC.

To reduce, maybe improve performance or reduce memory bandwidth or latency. So, those will be the good benefit. We are also exploring other techniques like a different use case and maybe different I/O traffic type. Right now, it's kind of limited. Work with Brockom and to identify what kind of traffic may be useful. Yeah. Google, I mean, we should give him a chance for once to ask a question. Sure. I think that's been out for ages. No, I think now Google is still. There? Yeah, okay. You hear me? Okay, my question is: we have a story chat to support the secure ID in it. That means every queue, every distribution being five to one four. And my question is, if we're Core binding a ring, pulling this ring, and this ring is in the L2 factory. Actually, in our mesh network, the smoother feeder knows the catch line it is. So if the core pulling the The ring in the L catch, and actually, the NIC sends out a stash, I mean the stash transaction to the network, and the smooth feature the home node or the smooth feature of home node.

The transfer stack catch line into the L2. So since it's not need explicit, I mean the CPU IT setting for the queue. Yeah, but how how did you instruct the CPU to do the uh placement? You you got you say you got the uh CPU uh I CPU call ID for the uh I I didn't uh yeah, I mean I didn't purge CPU ID. I mean the coding the the the The code zero calling the queue in the L2 cache and catch in the L2 cache. So, smooth feature nodes catch line where the catch line it is. So, when the NIC sends out the stashing transaction to the network and then smooth and then the home node. Would transfer the category into L2K. That would stash it to create. So, since we needn't explicit, I mean, the ST tag setting, maybe the ST tag for the setup of the layer, level level, ST. Type is flexible, you can define it as stated label. It's called the station, you want to station to the L3, you want to station L2. But since we didn't to determine, to give the hint to which CPU I needed, because the new feature could help you to.

Yeah, I I I think uh I think you need to take it win. You ask the question. I mean I'm happy for you to take it offline because we need to give money a chance. Okay. Yeah, we we can take it offline. I I yeah. So I I think the key here is of uh flexibility. You guys have to use a static pinning for that. That's my understanding. We can take it offline. Sorry. Thank you. All right. Thanks. Thank you.
