SNIA SDC 2025 - Scaling RAG with NVME

This uh this session kind of follows uh the previous one. It's about in inferencing, but not on the KV cache side, but more on RAG. And this is more like a summary of what I have to understand in order to get value out of GISKN because it was interesting, like a couple months ago, somebody showed me. a report showing numbers that I couldn't understand and I wanted to compare or have an idea how to compare. It's a lot of echo, so okay, but anyways. So what are we going to see today is more how I kind of built that uh understanding of uh vector databases and how it just uh made sense to me. All right, okay.

Okay. So I'll be starting with uh embedding, vectors, search, and I think with May uh get better now. Yeah, that's way better. Way, way better now. Thank you. So uh restarting. So um The way I built that knowledge is, okay, understanding what's our embeddings, vectors, or the vector database, similarity to search and indexing. And the most important how to compare different indexings and to get to the point where The point of the talk actually is this KN, which is another offload, storage offload technique for indexing, which we've seen with KVCache, everything kind of happens in memory, or in this case for RAC, DRAM, main memory. But the memory wall is getting to point. The data is growing too much, and we don't have enough space for all the data that we are creating. So, starting with vector database, why do we use them?

There are so many applications, but they provide similar research. So the the thing that we want to understand is vector database provide similarity search. And this is what gives RAG the response. So it is not an exact response, so it's not 100% right, but what are the most likely correct responses? So there's one big difference in the search for using vector database is that mostly there won't be an exact answer. But what is the most likely correct answer? So that will be very important to remember. So talking about vectors, sometimes we understand vectors as from our physical science, right? X, Y, Z, how to do it. Mathematics and they're normally spatial to 2D, 3D, but with vector database in data science, they are very abstract. And millions, not millions, but could be thousands of vectors.

And points. So that's one big difference is, you know, we are dealing with spatial XYZ, so we have to forget about that and work about how many dimensions, how thousands of vectors. And we are trying to locate. Proximity. So we use cosine L2 to understand in the vector database what are the clusters or pages that are closer together. And that's what's going to give you meaning. So when we talk about Similarity search, some concepts like embedding, similarity, KNN, clustering, indexing, recall, those are very important. So embeddings are the representation of the vector. Similarity is how close things are, one to another. KNN is the number of uh nodes, clusters that are closer. So that's kind of the uh response that we're going to get, right? Clustering are the partitions, so uh a vector database can grow so much, so we need to uh divide uh shards, so those are uh clusters.

Indexing is what enables the search. So, another interesting point is if you know regular database management like Microsoft SQL, Oracle, you don't necessarily Have need to have an index to query the data. It's just that's going to be slower. On a vector database, you need the index. So if you don't have the index, you don't have access to the data. So it's not only for speed, but actually to access the data. You access the data, I'll extrude the indexing. And recall is the mass. Of quality. So it's one of the key important factors when you're comparing two techniques and two answers, you need to know the recall. So, how good is your model? And that's going to be one of the points that you need to. compare. You need to know what's the recall rate when you're comparing A, B and C indexing techniques or uh models. Because if you don't know, that is just uh uh it is meaningless any type of uh measurement like uh queries per second. Um

And latency. So, embed this just a little bit more is high-dimensional, dense. You enable similarity search. And one thing that I kind of understand: the similarity search gives the idea of the intuition because. I can put things together and understand that one thing is related to another in the vector space. This is kind of an example of what a vector, I mean, an amd is like. It's just you putting a lot of Qualities in the object. An easy simple example, actually not easy, but a simple example of vector simulatory search is doing arithmetic. So, in this case, I can infer, or the system can infer if king and man, queen and woman. So, if I have a king minus a man, I could have something like that. So, you have the

coordinates of every object, and you can do arithmetics with that and come to an answer. So that's um uh one of the techniques that uh we call um the simility search. We always do vector um math. So in order to uh kind of understand this KN, which is one type of uh indexing techniques, we kind of go over uh other indexing techniques. We're just going um little bit just uh sitting, you know, just uh touching on each one. Just to have an idea when we talk about this KN. One is flat, or brute force is just basically an array. There is no coordination. Actually, if you create an array, you create a flat indexing. It's compute intensive and Normally, it's used for very small data sets, right? Because you don't have any techniques to search. It's actually a brute force search. You go to each entry till you find the answer that you're looking for. And this is the only technique that

Gives you 100% of certainty because since you're going to every single entry, you're going to have an exact match. Our other techniques are not exact match. They are close enough match. Another very popular One is a tree-based, which is you can call anoi as well, but it's another similarity search. It's a binary search, so you kind of divide your vector space in clusters until you get. You have enough neighbors and connections. Again, you can go and go and go and go till you find that, but then the more you break down, the more clusters you create. More connections you have, so it will take longer to fetch an answer because you have more connections. So, everything in inference frag is about the trade-offs, right? How exact you want to be or how fast you want to be.

To be. Those are going to be your one of your parameters. Another one is how many queries you want to do in a particular data set. So ANN approximate nearest neighbors. Basically, I pick a point and retrieve as many neighbors as it is set on your search parameter. So I can retrieve 10 neighbors, 20 neighbors, 100 neighbors. That setting also will determine how faster you're going to Have and how exact your answer is going to be. Another very common indexing technique is a graph-based. So if you hear HNSW is a graph-based technique. So, they use instead of clusters, they use small worlds, which is basically we start with a top-layer point. It's a random point in the vector space, and we start creating small worlds connected. So, again, I can't.

create a map of connections. Everything in vector index is gonna be a map of connections. It just matter how you build that uh matter uh that those connections, those are going to be your another common one is IVF. Inva uh in vect uh Inverted vector files. Again, you create points, clusters. And you may have heard about KNN, which is basically give me a certain number of nearest neighbors. And this number K, it is what you make up. So it can be 100, like I said, it can be 25. It is a number that you're comfortable about creating those partitions, right, or clusters. And then there are the quantization-based, which they were created more to preserve memory, so they are less memory-bound, so they require less memory. So you have two main types: scalar and product. But basically, I'm

using uh less um precision. So you create a a smaller indexing. So by using less precision, you already know your uh recall rate may suffer because you're Taking away precision in to have more speed or to have less memory pressures. Those are the two types of quantization. And then we have hybrid where disk KN is going to be, which is, I choose more than one technique. And those come again on the requirements, you know, how much memory you want to spend, what's your precision point, what's your recall. So the quality of your search will be met. Right. So you have the requirements. So again, it's not uh one is better than another one, it's just uh what are the trade-offs that you want to have. Right. So this KN is considered a hybrid because it's going to use graph and it's going to use compression.

So, when we get to comparing vector databases or vector indexes in this case, so we are doing a search, so we're using that index, we need to know the recall. So we create buckets of recall, like 80%, 90%, 95%. So think about on the story world the percentiles, right? So we have the 95%, the 90%iles, so where you want your recall to be, and then you compare. compare latency and throughput. So if you don't have that, if you're comparing a fifty percent recall rate to a eighty-five percent recall rate, uh you're going to have you know really uh high uh query per second. On the lower recall, because you don't care much about the quality of the answer, but how fast you want the answers to be. So, the lower the recall, you're going to have better numbers, but the quality of the answer is going to suffer. Again, that comes.

With your trade-offs, right? So you need to know the trade-offs to choose one, and you need to know where are you at the recall requirement in order to compare two, three indexes to choose which one is better for you. I say that because now when we talk about disk end, which is using storage, using block storage to offload part of the indexing, you will see some numbers that are counterintuitive With what we expect, right? We expect our in-memory indexing to be faster than an offload in disk. But it might be the case for certain types of models, certain types of search, because we get what's your recall rate? Type of indexing. How many neighbors in that indexing are you creating? So when we talk about Kn, clustering, and graph, we have the density of the index, which would be how many points are connected to each other.

The highest that degree, that density, the lowest is going to be your response because I have to query and retrieve more information per query because I have more neighbors. So it's just in the street, if you have three houses. Each house has two neighbors, but if you have a hundred houses, the number of neighbors per house will increase, and so it will take longer. And also, the index creation, which is the build time, will also be affected. So for HNSW and by the way, all the previous ones that I mentioned, they are all memory based. So once I create the index, they all live in memory, right? Uh but this K N, which uh we'll see that it's a m uh memory part and disk part. But you can see here, for instance, for HNSW, you have your queries per second and your recall time, right? So the higher your recall, so the better quality you have, the lower query per second you have. Again, this is

just how it is and then the number of vectors. So we're talking ten million, a hundred million and a billion vectors. Those are going to also influence on how fast you can query and how well you can query. And also, we heard in KVCche and vector database is going to be the same. What's your precision point? So you can have FP16, FP32. So FP32 carries more information. Thus, your index is going to be higher or bigger. So we require more memory. More time to build, so on and so forth. So that choice is very important when you're comparing. Again, if you're comparing FP8 and with FP32, also you're going to see different results for the same model. And that was something that it took me a while to understand. Yes? Correct. Yeah, so but you can basically achieve the same.

Well, i i in this case it's uh it's not about the tokens. The tokens are uh when you have an input, right? So uh reg in in a sense is just to extend the Knowledge base, right? So we don't have the idea of tokens. It's just part of the input requires a set of documents or a set of knowledge that was not part of the training. So you don't have the idea. Of talk is you have idea uh of okay, I'm uh giving back this information to the inference uh inference pipeline, and then that's that's going to over here your um like money for. Yeah, but not in the idea of a vector database.

The idea of the model that you're using, yes. On the idea of vector databases, you're doing a query of X amount of neighbors or points, right? And that answer is going to based on how. You build that. And one thing about vector databases are most are not real time, so they don't update real time. So there are new data and they just update index. Normally, you have to rebuild index. And that also is like a drawback for. Having that because it's very static. Once you have that pool of information that you want to extend your LLM in this case, you create. And then, if there are new information, you normally have to recreate that index. But, yeah, so when you talk about tokens, It is an inference pipeline, but when it gets just for the vector database, it's just get a search for that. All right. So, but again, this is just to show the influence of many things, right? The number of vectors.

The precision, right, and the index technique is going to affect where you are in your numbers. So your queries per second, your throughput, your latency. So this KN came to the point of. Of the memory wall, like we saw in the previous presentation, right? So we have a finite amount of memory in a particular system, right? And from a point on, you have to expand, you know, scale out your solution in order to accommodate how. The data that you need to be indexed in this case, right? So, one quote is like: the current state of AN search generates ints that must be kept in memory. So, that's one of the limitations, right? So the Higher number of vectors we have with X amount of dimensions on that vector, we need more memory, right? And that comes to a point where you need to scale out, and scaling out adds more latency.

Because I need to crawl every single chart of that index that is divided across the nodes. I need to go across every single chart. So that's going to a point increase your latency, right? Because you need to crawl many nodes. So, across network, your east-west communication, you add that. So, one study that brings to disk AN is: okay, let's put part of this index in disk, but at the same time to minimize as much as possible. Possible going to the disk. Because we know as a storage, every time we go to fetch something from block, from disk, from storage, you pay a really big penalty. But creating different techniques to create those index, you can achieve the same. Quality that you would expect from AGNSW or from ANNs, which are all based in memory with disk offload. And that will create a less demand for memory.

Which is one of the big biggest things for this KN. So, one example, I have a regular uh computer, six four gigabytes of RAM. I can run one billion data points or vectors, right? Um this is uh S1. Um Uh SIF1B is just a data set that you can find in the internet. And we can achieve, for instance, 5,000 queries per second at less than three milliseconds at 95% recall rate. And so Those are numbers that are comparable with regular indexing. And again, when you're doing the comparison, you want to know everything there, right? Your data set, your amount of vectors, your dimensions. That's what you need to know. And what's your real Target. So you, okay, I want ninety five percent recall target. So that's where you're comparing. So talk about the RAM footprint, right? So since we talk about in every indexing technique being memory.

Right, uh stored in memory. Here is um how much uh of uh what's the percentage of the data set that is physically when you create the index, how much is uh going to be in RAM in percentage. So we have Different indexing techniques, and now you have the percent of data set that's actually stored in RAM. One interesting thing, obviously, RAM or raw, it's going to be 100%, obviously, if you put everything in memory. NSW, actually, you need more memory than the physical data, just because the way you create the indexing. This is again just to have an idea of why we are doing disk AN. So when you created the index, And that's going very closely to any type of index technique. You have the data, you create the embedded, you cluster that, you start building your graphs. So when you get the embedded, you compress the data and you add to DRAM.

In case of disk AN, uh we have two parts, the DRAM part and the SSD part. Uh but uh there are different things that are uh stored. So when you talk about DRAM and disk AN, we store a very compressed uh view of my graph. So, think about HNSW, very compressed and with a lower precision. So, it actually stores with a lower precision, right, in Dirand. So, your Dirband footprint is very small. And on the disk part, Or what we have is out the graphs that were supposed to be created as a graph-based index, it creates kind of a flat file. So there are no a lot of layers. A flat file, which makes it easier to fetch data when I don't have that. So, the what's in memory, I have just the points and the number of neighbors, and which most of the time give you the exact location where you have to go to that flat.

Structure to achieve data. And that accomplishes the point of not having to go to the disk a lot of times. Because normally, when you have that type of loading and just the regular indexing technique, every time that I let's say, have a A miss. So I retrieve a number of neighbors, but it's not where the search needs to be. I have to go back and go back. And that kills your performance just because you're going to disk so many times. So one idea of disk AM. Is the information that I have in memory in DRAN is good enough to have very few trips to the disk to actually retrieve the data. As far as the architecture, it's a Vamana-based algorithm. So we have, like I mentioned, memory and disk hierarchy. So in memory we have compressed representation of all the points, and on disk we have that flat graph, what they call Vamana graph.

Points of the disk is we have offline reordering and the graph connections are in sequential layout, which we kind of touch-based that. And the type of search in the disk, instead of being a greedy search, it's a being type search, which is No hierarchical over a single flat layer, which basically comes back to the point. Let's not do any unnecessary trips to my disk. So, another way to represent that, right? So, let me Get a little bit closer so I can read. So that's kind of how you represent. RAM, you have all the embeddings compressed, and on SSD, you have the full embedding, and ID. Is for the neighbor. So again, I on that flat graph, I have the completed structure on a flat line, but I know all my connections. So when I retrieve information from a particular vector, I also retrieve

All the connections that are made. So I don't need to go to the disk again to know that. So I can be very effective, and in this case, produce results that are comparable with AJNSW alone, or sometimes. Even better than HNSW, depending on the model type and where you want to be. Which we're going to look a little bit later. Just reiterating what I've talked about. Already, right. So regular search operations, they are high-disk IO, so not good for your performance. With this KN, it's we fetch neighbors sequentially. So, low disk operations, so we go and we cache data in Uran. And interesting enough, that caching data is updated throughout the life of the indexing. So, as long as it is up and I'm having search that

Um map that is in your end is uh updated. So um theoretically with time, as more you use uh a disk n indexing, you should get better results just because I'm I'm uh updating that. That all comes to those types of results. That's kind of a study that SolidIM did with a Metro AI. And we get those type of results. And that's why where I started to look at it. Because they asked me, like, do you agree with those numbers? And I'm just like, I don't know. I don't have any idea of how to interpret that. Most is you telling me that a AoV memory indexing. is as fast as a disk offload that does not make sense, right, does it must not be true. But I started digging and how we came to this type of uh um answers and actually surprised me as well.

It does make sense. So in this case, we have for a hundred million vector, actually ten million vector this one. Well it's there, ten million vectors and seven hundred and sixty eight dimensions. Those are the comparison between Agent SW and DiscN on both latency and QPS. You can say, oh, actually, AGNSW is higher latency. But just looking, you see that they are very comparable. You could. use this KN with the same search quality as HNSW with Let me go here, uh just skip, with the advantage of not having uh too much memory, uh too much memory needs. So these are numbers from Muvo Salising tool, where I did a one billion vector 768 dimension and how much it would cost a solution purely based on the HNSW and this KN.

And so I have there uh how many cores, the memory and storage. Obviously we have local disk, which on AGNSA we don't need local disk because it's our memory. We're reading from remote uh storage. Um but the point here is if I put that in a cloud, um spending $9,000 against $23,000 monthly to have basically the same result, same quality of service. Yes. Um one uh is because A DNSW um is not as it does not have the efficiency on search that that combination of having a compress compressing Index with the our connections have because agent will not get out the connections with each point. So I have to go to that graph in order to find out the connections. The way this KN is created is that each

Point in that database, I know all the connections when I do the search. So actually, it's very efficient on going to find the neighbors. And once I know the address, I have to go to the disk and fetch the real data because I Have just compressed low precision data in DRAM. But the result is that both basically have the same performance, right? In this case, in this model. So you have to test every single type of model, but uh from what I have tested with real data sets, it's very um you find these uh very comparable uh results. So that's uh uh it's an interesting part. Yes? So the difference in storage is kind of stark when you look at the busy and end. Is that because the size of the indexing method on the HNSW is a much larger storage footprint?

print because uh we don't have a we don't create that uh low precision uh uh part. So the every point on the agent and stabil has the same precision. So it has on the disk AND you have those uh two different types. But uh since uh it is memory bound, obviously I'm doing the same work with less cores or less CPU because I need less memory. And that is the the main point. So if I have to create a solution to support a billion vectors, which today is like, okay, we have benchmarks for a billion vectors, but um it's very rare that people would be using that. But if you have to, this is what would cost you monthly on a cloud provider. Just because you would need uh X amount of instance to have that uh uh 4.20, 4.2 terabytes worth of memory. Because you have that uh um ratio of uh CPU to memory, right? Or V CPU to memory.

And the add additional part is that you would need local storage because I need that uh local NVMe in this case to uh get the flat graph. Going back, um if you're tuning this KNN, those are the parameters that are um Available, in this case on Mulvus. Why Mulvus? Because it is the current vector database that supports disk AN creation by out of the box. It has that option. Others that Support are from Microsoft, which created the disk idea. So on their VectorDB instance, they do have this KN option and they propagate or Claim the same type of results that Metro and I and Solidine did. Things to note: so when you're creating a disk again, important parameters max.

Degree. If you're working with H and S Lab, it's gonna be M, but it's how dense you want to be your index. So how many uh connections per point you want. Obviously, the higher the max degree or higher m, you have a larger index or and A better quality index in that case. Right. Search list. So when when you uh doing the search, so how uh how big your candidate list. So once I do a query, uh how many let's say points, neighbors I found. Catch with that search. So you have those different parameters. So those are ones that you control upon creation and search, but internally to Milvus and any other disk AN will have those types. Of settings like the budget ratio, search cache, and the Bing ratio. So, also how it prunes data and how efficient it is, but they are not parameters that are open or that you can select. You have to go to

Muvos config file and change those before you create the index. Yes? Search list size is a set tag to a value smaller than max degree. But your default is marked with the market. Those are what they mention when you open the the documentation for Muvus. And I know. But I had to be what the documentation said. And again, just the footprint, how much each vector size would be. Obviously, we have drawbacks. One of the biggest drawback is how long does it take to build the index. Disk KN takes a long time to build the index, right? So that's a really big point of consideration. Mainly not because you create just

Index once, right? You have to update this index constantly, and that will create this big problem to address because it takes an awfully long time to create the index with current technologies, right? Just want to mention that MLPerf Storage is working on a vector DB benchmark. So if you want to join and help us, feel free. And my call to action, since I'm running out of time, Is make real-time updates. So there's another Diskn base called Fresh DiskN that supports real-time updates. So this should be the direction we should take if implementing that. Address the indexing building time using GPU. In this for NVIDIA, they have QVS, CUDA vector search, which has a Vamana graph index built. So technically, you could create a Vamana.

graph using GPU and then use the CPU for the search. Still need to find out how in my lab at least how fast it is. But from GTC they they had the good numbers but they tested with only AJ and SW, not with this KN on the l uh the last uh GTC. And extend support, like I mentioned, Muvus is the only one who supports this KN, would be uh it's uh needed more uh support with other uh softwares. So we could more take advantage and maybe from the storage community which we could provide the support. Yes, question? We're mainly a serving areas with how that was sort of a model of fruit. Um you may be interested in that that's all available. Um I wonder about you may want to look back at uh you made a comment on uh for this last twelve or about uh they call me away. Uh

So you could also be interested interesting if you want to be able to hold it. Level of index in the memory and quantized, and you need to have the ground truth unquantized in the lowest level. But I understand that it's a kind of a research project at the moment to consider using quantized representations in the middle layer just for the sake of hierarchy. Particularly as we make it so that uh you can get directly to find great uh data in reach. Uh effectively all the tests that can really uh change up the outcome there. If anyone else has uh already looked at that or aware of that or is it just really All right. Yeah, um I have to to look at it. Uh I have it. But uh those ideas to use different techniques, right? It's um how uh y you get uh the best result that you're looking for within your your permits like uh

And today we do have the, like you mentioned, quantized, but not straight here. So the way regular products are based, they're based on the regular 90% what people use. Thank you. That's kind of all of it. We kind of run out of time, but we did some Q and A during the session, so that's fine. And feel free to approach and talk a little bit more. Thank you. Yeah.
