SNIA SDC 2025 - Rethinking Storage for the AI/ML Era: Disaggregation Powered with FDP

Thank you for joining my session today on the rethinking storage for the AMLRA, disaggregated storage powered by flexible data placement. I am Satish Kumar from Samsung Semiconductor India. India, and I have my co-authors Amit Devak Khan, Arun Kumar Singh, and Ratish Kopinath, who also worked along with this paper in this presentation. Here's the agenda for today's discussion. I wanted to talk about some high-level overview of general. Generative A and wanted to take into the stable diffusion, one of the key models which is so popular in the generative A. And I wanted to talk about a couple of storage aspects with respect to storage A, I mean stable diffusion. And I wanted to highlight some of the on-prem deployment with respect to NVMe over five. Fabric, and uh wanted to highlight a couple of storage challenges, what we have seen in uh the stable diffusion, some of the I/O characteristics. And finally, wanted to cover up some of the FDP and uh the right amplification factor uh with respect to the storage diffusion application. So generative AA. So A is now everywhere. Since then this uh LLM got introduced, this A is taking into the different world. Now with the help of generative AI we can able to generate most of the images, text, audio and video uh in the fraction of seconds. which literally revolutionizing the various industries such as manufacturing, design, gaming, education, medical or even multiple, including IT.

Precedence research predicted that by twenty thirty four, the market value of the generated AAs Around $1.005 trillion, which is a huge, huge business which exists today in the generator AA. This generator AA not only demanding more GPUs, but it's a very storage-hungry application. With the current prediction, From Grand View Research, the storage infrastructure, which includes both hardware and software, it's going to reach somewhere 25.9 compound growth by 2030. So, this is a good time that the storage is being used in training. checkpointing, inferencing and the retrieval augmentation generation. So it's a good time. We need to think to build a high performance, highly reliable and a good petabyte of capacity and with high secure storage for meeting the generative A workloads. So let me take into the stable diffusion, one of the key model that has been introduced in twenty twenty two. This is a deep learning based model. Uh basically it used for text to image generation. So this was been a open source model released by Stability A and since then this has been used widely in Design, entertainment, gaming, healthcare, and even predominantly in the fashion technology industries. The vision research predicted that by 2033, this A image generation business is somewhere around $1.84 billion. Right side, you can see an image which was. Generator from the text prompt a photograph of an astronaut riding a horse, which is an imaginary image, and that brings this uh the reality view of what the how the imagination of text prompt into an image. This is exactly how this is.

stable diffusion, which is primarily generated image application, brings the imagination into the reality. I want to take a little deeper into some of the stable diffusion model. So as I mentioned it's a open source stable diffusion model. I mean we basically which runs on the PyTorch uh uh framework as well as the Hugging Face open source frameworks. Hugging Hugging Face is basically a uh website which keep maintaining all the LLMs available in most of the different uh c companies as well as they are maintaining that different models for uh different uh uh LLM requirements. This has a key uh three components. First one is this clip, which is contrastive language image training. Basically this this is the OpenAI model which used to convert your prompt into a vector embedding. Uh Which does the similarity search from the intelligent of this model and try to find a vector which matches the text prompt what the user had given for converting an image or generating an image. Then we have a unit, which is basically a denoising uh process. It's a convolutional neural network. What it does Does it try to remove the noise from the image and try to add exactly what the user has requested in the prompt into an image? And it has a variational auto-encoder. Basically, it does that encoding and decoding of the image to make that image into a more highly resolution image at the end. I want to talk a little more about the latent diffusion model, one of the key architecture behind this entire stable diffusion. So, which has three layers or three phases.

So, first one is the pixel space, then the latent space and the conditioning space. The pixel space is basically an image will be converted into a pixel. Pixels and which has an inbuilt encoder that compresses the image into a smaller image so that this smaller image will be given into the CPU for the better processing. Then, this compressed image will be go into the diffusion process. Basically, the diffusion process is all about adding a known non-profit. noise into an image so that that noise will be removed later. So this diffusion process is all about adding noise and bringing that image into a pure noise. At the end of this diffusion process this image will be given back into denoising process. That exactly where the noise will be removed Removed by layer by layer with the help of unit uh modeling. And every time it removes the noise, it tries to add an attention to the the image. Basically, the attention is like it's a self-attention and a cross-attention. For example, somebody requesting a model to uh landing an aeroplane. Into the rainy day. So the aeroplane with the same body color, same wings, with realistic one, which are built by the intelligence of the self-attention. But in the rainy evening or some sunset evening, if somebody requested for the prompt, that attention will be addressed. A cross-attention which comes from the conditioning. That will be given into the image, and layer by layer, at the end, you could be able to see the image what exactly the user has requested in the prompt.

Then, once again, we have a conditioning module, which is basically based on a user input, which generates. Get some of the semantic maps. For example, if somebody requests a plane with a red color, so you try to get that attention from the user and try to feed that during the process of denoising. Similarly, any representational images, those all information will be feeded during the denoising process. At the end, the user will get the compressed. Image that will be again feedback into the pixel space, which what it does was it does decompress that image into the highly resolution image. Finally, that image will be given to the user so that he can able to see exactly what he has requested in the prompt. These are typical architecture, basically, how diffusion. Works and how an image, a text prompt, would be converted into the image what the user has been asked for. Let me take a little deeper into some of the storage components of stable diffusion. So, there are four key components which play a crucial role in the stable diffusion. Is the pre-trained model, which actually we get it from the Hugging Face Network or the Hugging Face website. So, whereas the pre-trained model we get it, which can be used for generating the images. Now, the intermediate latent data. As I described the previous slide, every layer by layer processing happens. This compute if it running out of any uh resources, it pushes back the data into the storage and try to get read it back based on that the availability of the compute resources.

So, this temporary noise image also will be uh stored in the uh the basically on the storage. Then we have output image, which is basically the user, what they have requested in the prompt, will be created as an output image and will be stored in the basically the data store. And this whole process will be recorded as a prompt. The prompt and the log information will be recorded in the storage. These are the key four. Component exists when you look at a stable diffusion as an application. Now, let me take a little deep into some of the key storage-intensive components. So, the first one is the model load, and the second one is the generating images. So, these again play a crucial role in the stable diffusion. Process or the stable diffusion model. The model load is nothing but whenever the user wants to load a model, in a given point in time, the model will be loaded into the compute in a short time. And people, user given a choice to select the model based on their requirement. There are multiple models available. Which starts from 2 GB to up to 20 GB. The the latest model which came from the stable diffusion is uh 3.5 large, which is almost 20 GB in size, which which has been trained with 8.1 billion parameters, which has high resolution capabilities into the uh image generation. Again, this uh this all uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh options would be given to the user based on their requirement. He can choose to load the model and try to generate the image accordingly. So this is again very read sensitive operation.

In a fraction of second he wanted to load the model into the compute from the storage and try to generate the image what exactly he the the he or she wanted. The next one is the generated images. So, at the end of this process of stable diffusion, the prompt would be converted or generated into the realistic image, which is actually right heavy. And closely 5 to 50 MB per image would be stored in the storage. And moreover, this image size of Also growing as and when the and the resolution of the images also grows. So, as of now, we can see mH is somewhere around 50 MB per image, but eventually it will grow as and when the resolution of the model also getting increases. The whole goal of this paper is to Talk about this on-prem deployment of the stable diffusion and wanted to talk about this, the scalable storage provisioning for the stable diffusion application and the way to stress this stable diffusion so that it really stresses out to the application and try to generate more and more images and storage. Stressing the both compute as well as storage. And I want to talk about some of the analysis what we have observed during this exploration. And we wanted to highlight some of the key techniques or storage features to increase the lifespan of the storage devices. So let me start with the on-prem deployment. Versus the cloud stable diffusion deployment. So when you look at this stable diffusion or the generative A image generation, lot of cloud providers are existed today. But the key thing is that on-prem deployments are evolving in the businesses.

The key reason is the privacy. The market the business like marketing, the fashion technology is very sensitive to the innovation or the prompt they what they have used, which is very sensitive because that exactly adds the business value to their overall their business. Actually, that's exactly what the business delivers. So, they they have a little reluctant to start using the Cloud because of the prompt matters, the word what they have used, that prompt is it really matters, and the image also will be stored in some public domain, which eventually impacts their business for long run. So they are slowly adapting and moving into more and more on-prompt deployment of the stable diffusion or the generated. DAI technologies. Again, the next one is the control and the customization. See, if you look at today, today that all JNA, what we use is all driven by what cloud provides today. If you want to build my own pre-trained data set, or you want to train that existing model with my own context or business context. Let's take I'm a fashion designing company. I wanted to build a model with respect to more fashion designing context, which is impossible in the pub public domain or the cloud model. Whereas in the on-prem model which are given an option to train my My model into more context aware or the business aware so that I can generate more unique outcome based on what exactly the user wants. The next thing is the cost-effective. The cloud definitely gives that immediate ROI because there is no capex involved there.

But moreover, the long-term This on-prem deployment would help the businesses like some of the key businesses, what I mentioned, like the marketing and the fashion designing. And the access, the clouds are limited with the APA rates, whereas in on-prem, we have an unlimited access. Since it's an innovative domain, people had. Option to openly access as many as many tries to build their own set of outcomes. So, with that, on-prem is going to be deployed in future lot of stable diffusion deployments. Now, let me talk about. How we can deploy the stable diffusion service. So it's a very simple. We need to install some of the tools with respect to the stable diffusion. Basically, this is a PyTest-based application. So we need a Python as well as a couple of Git and Docker libraries. And we need to have a GPU driver. Then you need to clone the pre-trained model from the huggingface.com. Basically, this is the site where you can get the stable diffusion model, pre-trained models. Then we need to build an inference environment. How the user will going to access it and try to consume this whole stable diffusion model. Infrastructure that we can get it from the UI which is mentioned in this Docker, I mean Docker-based UI. The key thing is the provisioning storage for the model and the images. Basically, this whole application requires the provisioning of storage where we can store all our models. And we can even store more image. I mean, the images will be generated, will be stored in the exact storage, what we provision into the deployment.

And with the help of that, we can able to generate that image from the prompts. Now, let me talk about what exactly the setup we have used for our deployment. So we built a disaggregated storage setup with the help of NVMe over Fabric or TCP. We have used SPDK 25.05, which is a recent release from SPDK. So we built it on top of AMD Geneva storage server, which hosted 32. 216 TB TLC drives with a 100 gig network, which is connected over the initiator basically where the stable diffusion service is running, which gives I mean on the initiator we need to have H 100 or any GPU which is Good enough GPU to make this service more uh effective. And that that that uh initiator service where we have that hundred gig which is again uh connected with the hundred gig network. This this configuration of the setup gives the flexibility of disaggregated my storage as well as the compute. So, as and when The number of users increases, we can scale my compute nodes. Same way if I want to, if my storage requirement increases, or the more and more users are generating images, we can scale our target also accordingly. I mean, our storage server also, such a way that we can meet. Meet both demands, and we can even scale independently. So, stable diffusion is actually using the storage for keeping the model, keeping the checkpoints, and generating the images in the target. Here's a typical stable diffusion EI, stable diffusion graphical user. Interface. So, you can see that in the top left corner where the users are given a choice to select the model.

So, again, they are given a now the users won't wait for a long time to select the model, we just click that model. The 20 GB of model weights loaded into the in the GPU basically. And also this has a prompt, uh basically the text prompt where user can give what exactly he wanted to generate the prompt into an image. It supports up to seventy-five tokens. And the the good thing about uh this table diffusion UAE is that it supports negative prompt, which means you want to exclude some of the Some of the prompt or information for the image generation. So, for example, you are generating something and you wanted to say, I don't want the blue in color. Ultimately, the blue will not be added into the in your image generation. Then we have a couple of configuration parameters with respect to the stable diffusion. Basically, we can Select the sampling method, which what exactly the algorithm behind to generate your images. Then we can configure our height, width, which is exactly the resolution of the image, and the batch size-batch count talks about the number of images can be created in a given point in time. This is exactly what Uh GUIL uh graphical user of uh graphical user interface of this table diffusion. Along with image uh text to image, this stable diffusion supports image to image generation. Uh even we can uh we can do the checkpoint merger. We can merge multiple models to make uh another model with with with the more detailed information. And we can even train with our own data sets.

So, this stable diffusion provides all this possibility where the enterprise can deploy into their in their in their premise. Now, let me talk about one of the challenges we had seen and the containerization of the stable diffusion. how it helps. By look at the sta single stable diffusion is a serialized processing. What does that mean is uh when when I give the when when when the prompt is generating an image, if that operation is happening, if I try to add one more prom I mean if I try to give one more input, the new input will be queued until unless the previous one one will be done. Which is which was a bottleneck for multiple user environment, because only one image will be created at any given point in time. Because the subsequent inputs or the prompts will be queued. So, to avoid this challenge, what we found was we containerized this entire stable diffusion application into the Dockerized Image. So that as and when the new user get added, we can host or we can spawn a new Dockerized stable diffusion service where the user can access the separate access and they can able to generate the parallel image creation with the help of this Dockerized uh process. So this gives a flexibility To the user to scale independently as and when the number of users grows. And in the left-hand side, you can see that the Docker is being running on the multiple Docker is hosted on our initiator. So we wanted to stress this entire stable diffusion in our infrastructure. Structure. So, what we've done was we wanted to create a realistic workload to this entire setup.

So, for that, what we have done was we created a prompt.source file. Basically, what it has is almost thousands of user prompts. Basically, user users to generate that image. And with the help of multi-threaded Python program and this REST API support, we pick the random input from this prompt and try to give into this application, which generates that parallel images. And we stress that 25 containers at the same time. This exactly generates that as many uh it stresses both both compute as well as uh the storage at the same time. So, this is that this is the workload generator uh for the stable diffusion application. With that, we stress the whole uh system. Here's the NV top output, which basically talks about how this GPU. Will be consumed. So you can see that almost GPU is 100% utilized and this memory also closely 100% utilization. We reach that maximum utilization of GPU with the help of our workload generator file and which stresses that literally into the compute and which eventually generates More and more parallel images in the back end. Here you can see that those images got created and with the help of 4GB model, we created 1024 and 1024 HT quality images and parallelly these images are created with the help of the workload generator script what we have created. So, let me talk about the key storage characteristics of stable diffusion. We have developed a tool to analyze this storage characteristics of stable diffusion. This tool leverages the line the Linux kernel utilities such as BLK trace, BLK power, And the BTT utilities.

And there is a plotly library, which is basically an open source Python library to deploy a graph in a much more interactive way. So that we wanted to highlight what exactly the storage IO characteristics to here. And this So, this with the help of these graphical user interface graphs, we have found that some of the key observations from our different operations of this table diffusion workload. Let me take into the first thing. Model load for a single container. So, as I said, the model will be loaded into the compute from the storage. So, whenever a single container would be running, we'll try to, again, this is the graph. I just wanted to highlight about what exactly the graph means. X axis talks about the time and the O axis talks about the logical block address activity. So, in a given point in time, what exactly the law, which logical block address being consumed is highlighted here, and the blue colored dots show that it's exactly the IO activity on the given. Point in time against the against the logical block address. So if you look at here on the bottom one, the blue patch shows about shows exactly when a model load of a one container, a single container happens. I just wanted to expand what exactly it shows. So if you see that The LBA access is gradually accessing over the time, which is predominantly a sequential workload. So, whenever a single container model load happens, the LBA is being accessed over the time very gradually. You can see that subsequent LBA is being Being consumed or accessed by the storage.

So, this gives a better read-ahead and prefetching to the storage, which actually gives that bore a good advantage for the performance. But the next, we wanted to highlight one of the other dimensions of what we have seen on the multi-connection. Container load. Even though the bottom the workload looks like a sequential, I just wanted to expand that little higher. If you see that, in a given point in time, the three the L B axis will be jumped, which exactly the The sequential pattern becomes the random slowly whenever the number of users are increasing. So that exactly what brings the multi-container load from sequential becomes random when more and more users are getting added. So that limits the effectiveness of the rehead and Prefetching that eventually impacts the performance of the overall storage subsystem. So, this is the block distribution of the model load. So, we have a 128 K read, which is almost 65 percentage of I O and we have a 256 Kb read, which is close. 33 percentage of fiber, then we have a 4k write, which has done which basically some of the meta writes happening during the model load operation. So, what this is again the graphs are generated by the application what we have built to demonstrate what exactly happens during the model load operation. So, when the single user The pattern was sequential. When the number of users increases, the number of threads increases, the sequential pattern becomes random. That stresses the storage to more random aware than sequential aware. Now, I wanted to talk about on another.

Operations of this table diffusion, which is the key operation or key activity is image generation. Whenever the user requested a prompt, at the end, the image would be created and that would be generated into this storage or will be saved in the storage. So I just wanted that one, this is a bottom rectangle. What I have highlighted is something if you look at that, whenever that image is getting created by a single thread, this operation is a sequential write. It happens on the LBA sequentially. But at the same time, when multiple containers being looked at are Multiple containers are started generating the image, the I/O becomes random. That exactly what we found that whenever the multiple applications, multiple users, or multiple threads are getting accessed, even though the pattern or the I-O is sequential, this multiple thread becomes. Becomes your nature of your storage is more in random. This impacts definitely the storage performance as multiple containers or multi-user is the key requirement for any AML application because the storage is not meant for only one user or one application, which was maybe. archival or backup, we can use that. We can think that sto sequential can be the right candidate, but when you look at the AML, the multiple user is the bare minimum requirement because this is being used by multiple threads. So since random uh IO uh is is getting into the AA, It also implies some of the challenges into the table.

So it reduces the performance because sequential has an advantage of prefetching, read-a-head, and the batch writes, which eventually impacted by the random workload. As we know that i the storage subsystem is hard to predict at what exactly the the I/O Pattern. And also it eventually, since there are more randomness being involved, or scattered I/O is involved, which eventually makes your write amplification factors higher, then AND eventually writes more data than what host basically requested. The GC also will be kicked or triggered frequently because of this randomness plays a crucial role. The random IO leaves some of the partial invalid blocks that needs to be fixed or needs to be. It has to be GC has to be triggered to copy the valid blocks into the table and releases or erases the invalid blocks at the end. So, this would definitely or potentially impact the endurance and the lifespan of the storage devices. So, we know that the randomness placing Crucial role. We just wanted to try our stable diffusion with the FDP. So, this the left-hand table talks about, I mean, the graph talks about the access granularity of the image generation workload. We have 128K, 16K, 4K, 32K access blocks granularity during the image. Generation. So, what we found was this we just wanted to try this workload on FDP-enabled versus FTP-disabled device. So, that what one thing we have figured out is that is a 20% WAF reduction when you use the FDP enabled. Enabled device. So we just used four placement handles to trigger this workload and see how this is happening.

And with the result, we see the significant reduction of WAF. But the WAF brings, definitely the reduction of WAF brings more in the longevity of the device. Durability of the device and the performance also eventually added value to the overall stable diffusion application. I want to share the this is a summary of what we have done it. So, on-prem deployment brings a lot of control and privacy into the deployment. The storage is a critical Uh for uh the best better user experience. Uh we have provisioned NUMU over storage with a disaggregated and uh the scalable way so that as and when user increases and the storage requirement increases, we can scale our uh uh storage uh backend uh along with uh. uh the number of users. The random IO is inevitable, especially on the AA based systems. Since more and more users plays a crucial role, the sequential also becomes a random. So we need to start thinking how to build a hundred billion IO of storage as exactly what we all are talking since morning or even the FMS also there there's a good d Big discussion on how to build 100 million IAP storage. And the FDP, as we see, uh is reducing the WAF, which eventually increases the longevity and durability of the storage. And multi-tier storage is the key for uh the stable diffusion application, whereas the high performance tier would be used for. Having a latest models and image generation, because which is very sensitive to the time.

And at the same time, we need to think that low performance tier, where we need to keep the old models and the archived images, because people have a, will give an option to choose even the old model, also, because sometimes the same. Time some models give more precise information when they use the old models. So, with that, I wanted to conclude and I wanted to acknowledge acknowledge uh the SMRC, the Samsung Memory Research Center, for sharing the GPU setup for doing this research. And yeah, thank you. Yeah, please. So I noticed that you used the NVMe OF you use NVMe TCP. I'm really surprised that we're using a AI stable diffusion and which for storage. Assuming that you will require an RDMA session, so MEME TTP, no RDMA, so your performance could be severely hindered by not using an RDMA storage for a problem. Any reason would you not use MEME talking? So we tried both. Yeah. I tried the question. So the question was why don't we use that NVMe over R D M A then compared to the T C P for better performance because R D MA always expose the good good good performance. So so yeah, so it's a uh so we wanted to bring uh this deployment model for uh more generic. Because RDMA requires a specific infrastructure, especially the controllers or the HPAs or the NIC cards, which more than RDMA. So we just wanted to use, leverage the existing infrastructure with the Ethernet. Of course, as you said, RDMA definitely adds a value, which we'll eventually do that experiment. In upcoming uh time. So I assume you had a file system sitting on top of your storage in VHP4 in this case.

So the all the analysis you did is essentially what the file system is. Yes, you are right. So the question was this exactly we use that XFS file system on top of our block devices. So yeah, so the file system uses this uh it it takes that I/O and put it into the drivers. So it's possible that it is a different file system. There is a chance. Yeah. So so in our experiment, so the question was yeah. The question was how did you assign this reclaim reclaim handles to the workload basically. So we uh we use four placement identifiers for our experiment and that the IO distribution What we use, right? For 128K, 16K, and 4K, 32K granularity. We use that different streams to write it into the different placement handle. So, so yeah, so basically what we think was that the prominent I O what had happened here is that the 42, 16 K and 4K and 32K. So, which we define that the four placement analysis is a good choice for making this special. Application like this one. So, we use that the block size. Block size plays the crucial role, which we what we found was that the 4K IO is even bringing more WAF. So, we need to play around with the 4K block size. So in one of the requests you said that multiple containers are making it random. But I would assume that uh it would be the same model, same data. It would cache and all the GPUs or containers would share the exact same property. Why would it become random? question was since the caching can be leveraged how this big IO becomes random. So the GPU is again very specific to the resource.

So when we have multiple users being used it always fleshes out that the current context into back to the storage. Especially when you use more and more I/O getting generated for the image generation, which always every user has its own choice of the model. It's not like everybody uses the same model. One user can use 1.5, another user can use their own checkpoint. model has its own set of uh requirement. So the caches caching can be limited, especially the resources what we have in the GPU. So we always cannot expect that always the caches going to happen. So that's exactly what we have observed. it could be cached nearby to require the soft channel and it's all the way back to Okay, I think it's a good question. So what we found was that most of the uh model load happens on the GPU here. So even though the one T B RAM we had, that GPU only consumed and loaded all the model weights into the GPU. So, GPU is very resource-sensitive. Whenever the new request comes, it tries to flush out the current latent, I mean, especially the diffusion process and try to take the new request. As I said, this is a single serialized way. It always tries to find flushing the current caches and try. To take the new request. So primarily the GPUs heavily used for this whole process of stable diffusion. I think then the question was my quote: why would work a cache in file system and not caching up? So the prompts are everything is different. So we always use the new context, new model load, and try to generate the image.

So every time we load, we create we load the new checkpoint or new model and try to generate the logo. generate the image so that we always wanted to simulate that it really loaded freshly and try to uh flush us the image generation also back into the storage. Uh yeah. So it's a single device. What we have used is yeah yeah. So we just created a beadoo from the device and we mapped into the initiator and try to uh build the XFS file system on top of it. Yeah. Uh yeah, I also have a question about With uh with this light here, did you uh run the exact apple to apple or did you do uh reverse engineered uh workflow and then run FIO? Exactly. So we just got the uh an FIO trace. And yeah, we just run it on same FDP same device with FDP enabled and FDP disabled, with the same g duration. And we have run it for eight hours, and that that's exactly the interval WAF what we have calculated here. Otherwise, we have to modify the table config and ready yet to modify it, but what we found was with this given workload distribution we can able to achieve that better WAF reduction uh for the on-prem deployments. Ex of us, yes. Thank you.
