AI Stack: AI Meets Storage Comparing On Prem, Cloud and Hybrid Architectures Across the AI Lifecycle

Welcome to AI Meet Storage, comparing on-prem, cloud, and hybrid architectures across the AI lifecycle. This is a webinar presented by the SNEA Data Storage and Networking Forum. I'm Eric Smith, and I'll be your host and moderator for today's webinar. And I'm pleased to introduce you to our expert speakers: Rohan Metov, member of technical staff, systems performance architect at Micron, and Bindu Tamala, Distinguished Engineer at Dell. Before we get into the content, I wanted to provide a quick overview. Of the SNEA community. SNEA is an industry organization that develops global standards and delivers education on all technologies related to data. SNEA is comprised of 200 industry-leading organizations, 2,000 active contributing members, and 50,000 participating IT end users and technologists worldwide. The SNEA data storage and networking community, also known as the DSN community, is an active group within SNEA that provides vendor-neutral education and insights for applying network storage standards and associated technologies to a broad spectrum of end-to-end solutions. Now, some logistics for DNA. Today, the slides for this session are available under the attachment tab at the bottom of your console. If you want to ask a question during the presentation, you could do so by selecting the ask a question option and entering your questions there. All questions asked during the webinar will either be answered live or as a part of the question and answer blog that we try to. No more than two weeks after the webinar.

And finally, please, please take the time to rate the session and ideally leave a comment, even if you need to leave early for some reason. The reason is we take your feedback very seriously because we greatly value your time and want to make sure you're getting the most out of each session as possible. And if you want to interact with people like this, Presenters of the session and other industry professionals, consider joining SNEA and the DSN community. We meet every week on Thursdays at 11 a.m. Eastern. Also, finally, the SNEA legal notice. I wanted to call your attention to this. It provides SNEA's copyright notice regarding the use of the material. SNEA is not providing any legal advice and therefore no warranties are being expressed or implied. So, if you want to reference this material, please do so at your own risk. Before we turn over to the main session content, I just wanted to introduce the AIStack webinar series to you. It's a comprehensive webinar program designed to deal. Demystify artificial intelligence from its foundational concepts to real-world applications. This series is crafted for individuals who are new to AI and aims to build a strong practical understanding of the entire AI technology stack. Those with more practical AI experience can selectively attend webinars, skipping the ones that cover familiar ground and focus. Focusing on sessions that provide additional insights or education. In other words, you can hop in anywhere. So, with that, I'd like to go ahead and pass it over to Rohan for the introduction. Thanks, Eric.

Welcome, everyone, and thank you for joining today. In this webinar, we're going to take a journey. To one of the most consequential infrastructure decisions that teams are currently making right now. That is where to put your storage for AI workloads on-premise, in cloud, or somewhere in between. In the first half of the session, I'll try to cover some foundations by recapping some key storage. Virtualization and software stack concepts from our previous webinar: deconstructing the software storage stack, storage software stack, which you can still watch on SNIA's YouTube channel if you haven't already done so. And then taking a deep dive into how cloud storage is actually architected under the hood. After that, my co-presenter Bindu will take over to take a deep dive into on-prem storage architecture, followed by fundamentals of AI workloads and inherent storage patterns, the storage architecture pyramid, and the protocols involved. And finally, closing on with some reference architectures and Decision framework that will help you decide which access mechanisms and storage solutions are best for you. The goal is that by the end of this webinar, you'll be able to take a look at any workload and reason your way to the right architecture. So let's get started. The title of today's session. Is AI mid-storage comparing on-prem cloud and hybrid architectures across the lifecycle? And the word I want to emphasize here is lifecycle because AI is not really a single workload, it's a chain of workloads. Starting with ingestion, preparation, training.

Fine-tuning and friends, and now agentic loops. And each of these stages have drastically different storage requirements. And the architecture that's optimal for one stage may be wrong for another. So, our goal today is to give a framework that's matching the right storage architecture to the right stage of the AI lifecycle that you are at. Before we dive in, one quick point to reflect on is that until a couple of years ago, all the storage decisions were made after compute. So things like capacity and available memory to the compute instances, the rise of managed storage. Architectures like cloud and on-prem were largely driven by sales of disaggregated compute cycles in the form of VMs and containers. And then people just needed some disaggregated storage to stash the associated data that the applications are generating or needing as part of their executions in these VMs and containers. And then readily available to scale up and down based on the needs. With the advent of AI, the scaling model has proved insufficient. GPU utilization, which is our most expensive resource today, is now gated by storage throughput, latency, and data movement costs. So getting this right is. No longer just some back-end themes concern. It's directly related to the AI economics. So, before we start, a quick poll, we want to gauge how familiar are you with this topic. So, the option A is I'm new. To this, option B is: I work with storage architecture, but I'm looking forward to learning more.

And option C is: I live this day and night, we consider ourselves somewhat of an expert, and you still want to listen on. So, yeah, I think this portal allows, I think, gives you a minute to. Share your responses. Yeah, so please go ahead and vote. This is just, we just want to gauge the audience, type of audience that we have, and what state are and in their knowledge of storage and storage activities. This really helps us to make sure that whatever next content we design, we take all kinds of folks, all kinds of expertise levels into consideration. And yeah. Got a pretty good mix of new people and people who are working with it, but would look like to learn more. So that's it. Interesting. 64% working with storage architecture, but looking forward to learn more. And then 14%. Diving this day and night, that's a recent link. So the poll ended. No, okay. Um, right. So uh let's start with some basic definitions. Cloud storage is essentially a mechanism where your data is living in an infrastructure that's typically managed by a third-party provider. So, think of hyperscalers of today, like AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud Provider, or Oracle, or OCS. It gives you scalability and elasticity. On demand. So you can scale up and down your resources as your workloads scale up and down and your usages shift. You can access your data remotely from anywhere and only pay for what you use. On-prem storage kind of flips that equation. You now own and operate the hardware by your own.

Either in a data center that you manage yourself, or maybe co-locating or sharing your data center space with some other on-prem users, you get direct control over your own data, tighter security protocols, and lower latency because you don't really need to be as complex and scaled out as. Cloud storage, public cloud storage needs to be, but you're also taking the full operational overhead and management. So you need the in-house expertise to manage every single piece of an on-prem data center. Hybrid storage is somewhere in between. So it's part on-prem, part on-prone, part-on-cloud. This is where. Most enterprises land today. It allows these enterprise customers to enterprise users, hybrid users, to optimize their data placement based on cost, compliance, security, performance for each workload, the data locality, governance in the area that they operate. The political rules and trade rules and things like that. So it's really a middle ground, and the trade-off is you would need expertise to manage both the environments, and depending on your use case, the requirements, you will have to hire that kind of expertise. Maintain it. The right choice ultimately depends on what your workload is and what your organizational priorities are. Okay, so a brief overview of the international standards organization definitions. So it's worth noting that ISO definitions are a little bit bigger. Different than what we typically use in the industry today. The ISO IEC 22123 is basically the document that defines cloud deployments as public, private, or hybrid.

But the key distinction that they make here is not about who owns the hardware, but where it sits and how you are accessing it. So a cloud, for example, a cloud is open for use by general public. And so then it's called a public cloud. A private cloud is essentially a single organization maintaining a data center by themselves for themselves. But the nuance is that it doesn't need to be on-prem. So, a private cloud can be owned and managed by an organization itself, or a third-party provider that manages it for them, or it can live on somebody else's premises. Even if it's hosted off-site by a public cloud provider, it's still considered private as long as. The access is restricted to that particular organization. So, yeah, when you use these terms, it's important to understand the differences and which kind of definition we are sticking to. So, I'm going to do a quick recap of all the concepts that we learned in the previous webinar. Deconstructing the storage software stack from legacy silos to AI. You can still watch it on demand right now. We have it on our SNEA YouTube channel as well as the SNEA Educational Library. So we started that presentation with talking about storage virtualization techniques. We learned about the two. Important categories of it: access-based virtualization and implementation-based virtualization. So, access-based virtualization typically covers block storage, file storage, and object storage. Block storage is essentially fixed IOs, IOs of fixed block size with no notion of a file.

So, typically, what databases are VMs loved for their attached virtual disks. File storage typically speaks NFS or SMB protocols. They use hierarchical namespaces, POSIX-like semantics, typically what day-to-day application users love. And object storage speaks REST APIs. They have flat namespaces, but very rich metadata because they need to know where the data is, and theoretically infinite scale. This is what all cloud native NAI workloads like. The key insight from here last time was that the same underlying media, so say a pool of NVMe SSDs. Known as a JBOF or just a bunch of flash, can be presented as any of these to any of these three access types, depending on what software stack you wrap around it. So, access type is just a presentation choice rather than an underlying hardware choice. I want everyone to hold on to this idea because we'll review. This again later when we dive deeper into the cloud storage architecture. You'll basically learn there that essentially all the services that cloud providers provide are on the same backend infrastructure. The second dimension was implementation-based virtualization, where so basically. Where the virtualization logic runs, could be their host level. So basically, their compute server where your application is already running. Just the virtualization layer sits there trying to manage all the internal drives, the DAS, the network loans, so logical numbers. So, it combines all of this into a unified virtual pool and presents it to your application.

This kind of virtualization is closest to the CPU, so it generally is the fastest. The more bare bones you are able to make it, faster, the better your performance is. Network-level virtualization typically sits in a switch. An appliance between initiators or targets allows you to do all kinds of scaling, like fabric management, provisioning, snapshots, things like that. Controller level was when your virtualization logic sits in the storage area itself. So you have a primary controller. Pool with its own capacity together that would connect multiple storage arrays, could be even from different vendors, and presents it together in the unified pool. We are not going to revisit this concept again because the only point that we need to know from here on is that a typical cloud storage provider. Offers all of these virtualization techniques, it's just invisible to you and opaque. They do it so that they can scale better. We also learned about the storage controller anatomy. So things like it was basically an intermediate layer sitting right above. Above a JBOF or physical hardware. And we talked about two components here: the front-end and the back-end. The front-end component speaks to the protocols and access mechanisms, things like where file, block, and object storage protocols are implemented. The back-end speaks to the media. Itself, so in VMing, SSD behavior takes care of all the metadata and where management and basically all the management and utility stuff related to that data itself. If you'll recall, like the software features that we're talking about.

Here, like data management, where management, redundancy, rate, erasure coding, all of the stuff that's mentioned here. These are all software features and software functionalities that help you scale and scale better, help you help your data be more resilient. And provide redundancies, but it trades, there's a trade-off here. So it trades every new feature that you add, like this will trade raw latency with some centralized control. We also talked about two concepts: indirection and redirection. This is kind of important because it's really. Useful in when you're designing a understanding how a cloud architecture is. So, indirection was about abstraction, so mapping logical to physical addresses. So, you can think like a flash transition layer that sits inside an SSD or an LDA to physical block. Mapping, so L2P that sits in any storage controller. This feature enables thin provisioning, snapshots, wear leveling without the application knowing about it. So, something along the lines of centralized control that we just talked about, of where the data may go, but the engine has. To keep track of it, redirection is about agility. So you're sending IOs down different paths during various situations like failover, migration, load balancing, or snapshot creation. You do this to optimize your availability, scalability, and performance. This is a little bit more static in the sense that if a path is chosen, you have to follow the path because if you don't do that, then you are essentially amplifying your read and write amplification factors.

This could be implemented as trivially as just every time an. Lands, you just force it to go to a predetermined location by doing some clever math. But if you do so, then you can share that predetermined location with other services ahead of time, and that will give you better performance. So, like I said, this is important because every single cloud service. Service provider uses a stack of indirection and redirection techniques. Then, an example here would be like the object stroid API that you call, that's redirection. It load balances across various front-end servers before landing it, before picking one. And then the object storage API key that you provide to do put or a get request, that's an indirection request because your logical key gets mapped to a physical location into one of those physical media disks that sit underneath. So understanding these two primitives is really important. How much time and resources you spend at each indirection and redirection layer determines your system's read and write amplification factors and hence your system's performance. The ideal scenario is you would have only one of each. Ah, right, we also looked at this alphabet soup of protocols. And protocol stack. One of the ways we interpreted this was from bottom up, which is we'll start at the physical layer with a bunch of NVMe or SATA drives. We'll have device drivers on top of it, which will enable the OSS block layer with its I/O scheduler and Device or file system mapper to speak the language of that underlying hardware. There might be an optional multipath layer.

Then we have features like RAID and logical volume management sitting at layer four, or around layer four, and then sorry, layer five. And then file and object or block storage interfaces above, which will basically. Give you these access-based virtualization endpoints. The reason this stack matters today is because when we move to cloud storage, this entire stack is kind of followed as is. It just gets distributed across various machines, racks, data centers, or even sometimes across various. Regions. So, in other words, the stack itself is getting virtualized as it gets scaled into the cloud. All right. So, let's transition to what actually a cloud-shared architecture looks like. So, this is a simplified view of what a typical cloud storage service is architected. So, the diagram on the left is from a Microsoft SOSP paper, I think, from 2011. And the diagram on the right is from a ByteByteGo post by Alex Hsu on LinkedIn. The kind of person I follow. There are three major layers. You'll notice there are three major layers or service categories in both of these diagrams. The first one is the front-end, which is also known as request handling service. The front-end there is usually application-facing. So, when we were discussing the storage controller earlier, we also saw the front-end there. It's kind of the same, functionally, functionally, it's kind of the same. This is the interface that receives the API request from clients or the applications. Clients can be web apps, CLIs, or SDKs. They're talking over multiple languages.

So things like Java, Python, JavaScript, or Golang. So you want your front end to be extremely rich in terms of what SDKs and languages it can support or accept these API calls over. They sit inside the cloud provider's intranet, so not really accessible to the public internet unless you are using going through their DNS or using some specific keys. So, basically, you would also want multi-path access control inside. Your front ends. Your front end authenticates and authorizes the users, validates the requests, and then routes them to the correct storage service that it requests based on a map or a partition map or a metadata map that it has to maintain locally. I'll talk about it briefly next. what it is. This layer also includes DNS routing, load balancing, encryption, decryption, compression, decompression, batching, and other features, which are more so more so related to how the service is actually perceived in terms of quality of service to by the users. By your customers. So, as you scale in terms of customer requests, the goal essentially shifts from doing just authentication and authorization to also conducting a lot of these other services, providing a lot of these other services, so that you are scaling very Quickly, it provides elasticity, high availability, lowest latency. You would also want to distill some of the IR requirements that you can gauge from just from the request header, the format of the request. The back layers, as we saw the term in the The storage controller earlier, the back-end layers are what orchestrate the actual data services.

The digital dial requests that come from the front-end are converted to storage-specific semantics so that the system can speak the language of the storage drives. And then you do the media-specific services like reads, writes, health monitoring, data protection. Data retrieval, erasure coding, stuff like that. The main goal here is to organize the data safely and securely with certain guarantees while providing the best performance, resiliency, and longevity, like redundancy of your data. There are two main services that fall under this back-end category: the one is index. On the metadata layer, also known as partition layer. The other is the stream or storage layer or data placement layer. The metadata layer is where every object, file, or block store gets a unique identifier and an associated metadata. So information about where. And when of the data. The metadata services track these locations, timestamps of last access, last modified, last read, et cetera, so that you know when you're reading, you know which version and which version to read. What's the latest version? What's the correct version? Its primary responsibilities can be some. Summarized as into five things: like managing and understanding the higher-level data extraction, so blob, like blobs, or objects, or block files, like or blocks. So, basically, what the front end tells you to, if it is this link. Their request properly. Then, second is providing a scalable namespace of some sort, if it's a file or an object storage. Providing some transactional ordering and consistency features.

And then basically, then. Giving that I/O, offloading that I/O request to this underlying stream layer for actual read or write operation. Sometimes there's also cache maintained at this layer. In storage and the data placement layer or the stream layer, the actual physical storage of the Of your data is actually handled here. The layer stores the bits on disk. The stream layer can be thought of as a distributed file system within a storage stamp. It understands files as streams, which is basically just an ordered list of large storage chunks. Called extents, how to store them, how to replicate them, how to bring them back if using erasure coding, if things fail, using peri bits, if things fail or die or get corrupted. So to protect all this data loss, and you have to. Make sure that error recording and zone replication techniques are supported here. There are many other durability and recovery services also provided here. So, things like checks and verification, background auditing, disaster recovery. So, if the entire storage stamp goes down, something has to recover the data from one of the replicas. Finally, there are also some tertiary security and compliance services that run in the background that protect the system from unauthorized access. So, identity access management, DDoS mitigation, locking, versioning, sequence number control. So, these utility and management services may or may not run as part of these three fundamental layers. They could also run as separate background services that are in charge of this lock management, logging, and things like that.

So, these utility services, they don't need to. Run on every storage stack. They could be running on a portion of storage stack as well, so that you are utilizing your resources more efficiently. So let's trace a simple put request to a cloud storage. So say you're uploading 100. Megabyte of some training data into an object bucket. As we saw in the architecture earlier, the step one would be you would hit the DNS and load balancer first based on what SDK used and how your API is formatted and where you are. Essentially, sending a request from what IPs are currently active in that region, or what subnets are active. Based on that, the DNS will return the IP of a load balancer in your nearest region. Load balancer will use the IP and all of subnet and all of that information to redirect you to one of them. The front-end server that is best suited to serve your load. So, this is, remember our concept from earlier? Like, this is pure redirection, extreme agility, like load balance is the one deciding which path to go, which front-end to hit during runtime. And once you're assigned that frontend, you have to go there until something else happens that decides that, okay, this front end is no longer the right one, pick a different front end. Then, when you are at the front end, you would go undergo the authentic: so authentication, authorization, value. To signature and identity access management policies, and confirm that whether you are allowed to do that operation, put operation using the key that you have provided. Then it will also decide the service.

So, in this case, it's an object storage service. So, it will decide that, hey, this is an object storage. So, when it transfers. The request to metadata, it'll tell that this is an incoming request for object storage. At the metadata layer, it will decide which partition which partition to put that metadata into, which storage. Knows to actually write what are the availability zones of that storage based on your subscription of the services and what durability guarantees to provide. So, this is basically a giant indirection layer here at planetary scale. Like your object key gets mapped to a physical data placement plan. And that's decided by the metadata lookup layer. And then finally, at the data placement layer, your data is streamed to one of the back end storage nodes. All the redundancy and resiliency services are applied here. So, things like erasure coding, you could say, like, you are 100%. Megabyte object could be broken down into 10 fragments, 10 data fragments, and for parity fragments. It will be 14 fragments written across multiple storage nodes, across different availability zones. Once the data is written, you would need some form of a quorum, so durability confirmation that I have written. In at least 12 out of 14 segments that will ensure that this right is confirmed. If at all something were to happen after this, I can safely recover the data that's written and provide the customer the guarantee that that's part of their SLA. So, this is where, like, right. Latencies tend to get higher.

So it depends on how much of a quorum you want and how much of durability you want to provide. And then background services will take over. So checksums will get verified. Background auditor will scrub for BitRot. Application services may copy the data to multiple cross-site. Zone cross regions, depending on your whether you have subscribed to those services or not. Garbage collection or defragmentation services might hit if you hit certain limits on your extent or something is sealed or things like that. So as an exercise, I would leave. For you to think how a GET request would look like. What would happen if you're doing a GET request of an 100-megabyte, that same 100-megabyte trading chart? And then also think at a scale. So, what would happen if what would happen if there are hundreds of simultaneous GET requests coming? For that same data. A key thing to keep in mind here is that the metadata service layer is a good place to decide that the data can be read and sent back as part of GET requests from any of the fragmented locations that. That it has created the replicas across. So that would basically ensure that your reads scale beautifully in the cloud. Yeah, so let's talk about the hardest problems in cloud, which is durability, consistency, and cloud. Placement, your cloud storage provides, says, like they will provide nine nines or eleven nines of durability. They will make sure that you will have n number of copies here. They'll provide erasure coding. These are all services that they provide to make sure that you have all the durability.

Consistency and optimal data placement, along with like doing on-demand sharding, merging, load balancing as you scale up your requests. You will notice here that in the cloud-storage architecture, there are two levels of interaction: one when the data comes in. And it's stashed in something like a lock-structured merge tree. That's an interaction. And when you actually write to a disk, disks have a flash translation layer, that's also an interaction layer. So this is kind of the hard problem to solve. Where you, how much of consistency you provide, where you place your data, how you partition it, and how you merge it, how you split or merge those partitions as you scale, will not only add more complexity to the solution itself, but also add. Latency like and give you a hit on performance when any of those things happen. So, the key takeaway here is that you're not just choosing certain SLAs, you're also certain SLAs of like 9-9s or 11-9 or 5 copies of it. Data, you're also choosing your trading off latency when you make your SLEs stricter. All right, finally, one last thing before I hand off is this basically tells that everything that you do, every interaction that you do with the Cloud storage is provided to you as a service. So, specialty services like modern specialty services like vector databases, tiered archiving, KV caches, they're all important. Every cloud provider gives them today. Every cloud provider boasts of a tree. Be high durability, optimized throughput at scale.

They all claim that they have the best products to offer for every stage of their life cycle. They all will show you this table on the left: that what is their appropriate access tier or a product that's best. For the AI lifecycle, more or less, the industry seems to have settled on training being done through objects, inferencing being done through either block or high-performance block or high-performance file storage. And Agentic AI would work. Want a high-throughput, small random reads. So, some like would have to utilize some of the specialty services like vector databases and all. So, it's still a work in progress. There's a rise of AI-focused file systems like Lustre, but nobody has currently. Have the answer of what's the best storage option or storage service that can serve identity workloads. But whatever it is, everything is typically going to run on the same infrastructure. So, with that foundation, I'll hand over to Bindu. Oh, there's a quick poll. Okay. I just wanted to, yeah, the poll is here basically. How helpful do you think the summary of the storage virtualization techniques and protocol stack was in understanding the cloud storage architecture that I just explained? So, helpful, somewhat helpful, not helpful, please. Yeah. Looks like we're getting a lot of very helpfuls. That's great. Great feedback. So we'll see how that works out over the next few seconds. If you have questions, please feel free to add them in. Like we said, if we don't get to them today, we will answer them during the QA blog post. So please feel free to have them come on in.

Just a couple more seconds, and then we'll move on with Bindu. And I mean, even if you put into the comments or a question sort of what would have made it more helpful if you're Saying somewhat helpful, just really anything like that would be helpful to us. Okay, so we're at the end of the poll. We'll move on to Bindu. Thanks, Rohan. Thank you, Rohan. Thank you, Eric. So, with that, and I'm With the foundation on the cloud side. Now let's get into the on-prem storage architecture. I think we kind of, one of the premise for the next couple of content is really to kind of discuss on the on-prem is chosen when teams need predictable performance, right? Full control over data location. And security and cost profile, and also utilizing 24-7 GPUs utilization. So, over the next few slides, we will look at the reference architecture, the majority storage architecture styles, and where each fits in the performance capacity and trade-offs. Also, touch on the AI workloads and their profile for the storage. So, as we're talking about the on-prem, let's walk through the building blocks of on-prem, right? AI factory, if you can think of. So, GPU compute pods, accelerated dense nodes, are the code. Consumers, right? Our goal is to keep them busy because GPU is the time and the cost. So we want to make sure that our goal in the factory is to keep GPUs busy. And the leaf spine network fabric, a non-blocking, it needs to be the Infini band or high-speed Ethernet fabric is what makes the East-West, which is GPU to GPU and GPU to storage traffic scale without bottlenecks.

The next one is the storage. Storage is a tiered asset. If you think of it, it depends on the performance from a performance. But a files from a file system, object storage, and then NVMe or fabric coexist. Each workload stage lands on the right tier. And then you have the control plane that kind of coordinates and provides identity and encryption across the holistic view of the solution. And also, storage providing the key aspects of the fundamental protection from replication to the encryption to the security to the policy-driven tiering. So, the key takeaway what we want to look at is the network and storage here are co-designed with the GP. So you can't size just the storage in isolation, but you won't understand your solution. And that's how you're going to size your storage. So we talked about the storage net. Let's jump into the next aspect, which is the storage architectures. Right on the on-prem. So Rohan talked about the cloud aspect. And on-prem, you can think of the three. Again, this is not prescriptive, but this is kind of generalized in some sense. So you can think of the three different architectures, right? Centralized, this approach is simple, simplifies the management, and provides strong consistency. I can limit the scalability. And performance due to centralized coordination. When we're looking at the distributed, we can think of the distributed, there's a client-assisted aspect as well. This improves the throughput latency and scalability for Active AI workloads while still leveraging the distributed storage backend for. Durability and coordination.

And in the client, you can think of the client assisted here, is where you have the RDMA, for example, right? That's kind of providing that bypassing the mapping layers, directly accessing the storage. The other, I think, the architecture. You can think of is the disaggregated. This model really enables extreme parallel performance and the low latency and high throughput, making it ideal for large-scale training and GPU-intensive workloads. So, the key takeaway is there are different architectures that suits for. Different workloads. There isn't one size-fits all in this case. So now we talked about the storage general architecture. Now, let's jump into the aspect of the combining the AI workloads and the storage and the architecture itself. So this pyramid is. Trying to capture is capturing the performance as well as the workload and the architecture. So, when we talk about the extreme active data, right, where you have the training going on, this is where the disaggregated really plays, and we have some of the industry examples as well. In the space that you can see. For example, the Lightning, GPFS, DDN. And then the next is really the active data. And this is where you can look at more in terms of the caching and performance, right? This is where you're pre-processing, training, information. And drag with strong throughput and rapid data access is required. And this is some of the examples for this: the distributed client assisted. You can bring up the Dell PowerScale and Author Scale with RDMA, VAST, VECA, and those are all kind of place in this space.

The next is really the capacity, right? The capacity tier. And this is where the distributed and centralized architecture really plays. And this is where you can think of really having that compliancy archive data lake and checkpointing and historical data. And this is where some of The architectures that fit in in terms of the here is some of the traditional storage that we have architecture can really fit in here. So, the key takeaway is you rarely pick one architecture, you blend them, placing each data type on the tier and bidding out the cost and price. Performance profiling that you're looking for. Now that we talked about some of the storage fundamentals, now let's talk about the AI workload itself, right? And some of the fundamentals in this section we're going to cover is actually the exercising the storage. Workload, how it exercises the storage in terms of the processing stage, in terms of the pattern, and in terms of the protocols. And the goal here is to really reason in terms of the storage requirement, depending on your AI full stage by stage. So, I'm going to build this one out for a couple of steps. So, if you think of this from the perspective, customers need complete data readiness for AI, right? It's not just having a model is good enough, the data is the key. Garbage in, garbage out. So, you want They need to make sure the customer has the data ready for AI. And it's not just the capacity, right? The workflow spans discovering the data, like initial staging, and then the of transforming, right?

This is really where you take your structured and structured sources, transform them for GM AI, for example, where you do the chunking, you do the parsing, you label them, you track the metadata, right? The next part is really: okay, now you have identified all the data and you kind of synthesize them. Now, the next thing is, how do you provide access to them to the workload that you're looking for? The training, be the tuning. That's where the identifying the right data, this is where your query or your semantic search comes into play, right? And this is where the key part of having the data in a format that's available in a performant manner. The next Aspect in this is really the at the end of the day is the freshness as well. It's not just having the data, right, able to access and you know chunk it and let it provide, but also want to make sure there is a freshness. So, overall, what you take away from this slide is really that the storage is an end-to-end from day. Lifecycle point of view, and you want to make sure the storage must expose capabilities at each step, not just the storage bits. So, the next thing that we want to talk about is really the aspect of. Now, we talked about different aspects of the data: the AI workload property. Progression, sorry. Training, inferencing, and agenting, right? In each stage, place very different demands on the storage. For example, when you're talking about training, sustaining high throughput, sequential reads plus large periodic checkpoint writes. In the inferencing case, we have the low latency.

Minimal delay in accessing the model weights, for example, and KV cache. From an agentic workload, storage becomes the semantic backbone. And that's where you have the embeddings, your knowledge graphs, your vector memory, and context artifacts accessed via standard interfaces. Some of the proprietary interfaces. We'll see that in the next slide. So, in overall, what the takeaway is: storage becomes the semantic backpoint for Agentic. It usually holds the raw data, and it also is evolving to support some of the. The context data in a sustainable way. That's where you can access the from an agentic point of view, from MCP servers, from a protocols. We talked about file, object, and block. But we also see some of the fundamental data types in the AI and even in the data management space, for example. Table and vectors and the KV are becoming the core data types, or you can think of them as the primary, right, first-class agents in the storage itself. So the result here is really reliable, retrieval, and consistent use of all representation across the agents and inferences. Services and storage needs to play that key role in this space. So, now let's talk about. We talked about the cloud, we talked about the on-prem, we also talked about the workloads and what the requirements are coming onto the storage. Now, the key for the webinar is to really.

talk about the decision making right how do you choose which is the right choice for from a point of view on the on-prem cloud or the hybrid right so the the decision is really need to be depending on a couple of criteria right Of the big ones is really data gravity. Where is the bulk of the data today? And what is the cost, time, and money of moving it, for example? And the performance: is the workload steady or bursting? Are tail latency requirements predictable enough for fixed size? So, that is one of the The big ones, if you're playing in EU space, right? Are the regulator contractual and jurisdiction constraints on data location? And I will also talk about the operations, which team owns, right? At the end of the day, there's also a lot more on the company. And the company organization. So it also plays a key role. I'm not draining the whole thing, you get the slides again, but I want to highlight the key aspects that you need to think about, that the customer needs to think about when picking what's the right storage architecture and where the right storage is on-prem model. The cloud and the whole framework needs to be. I think the goal here is not to pick one cloud or on-prem. It is to know which parts of the workload belong where and to design the fabric that lets you change your mind later, supporting you first or supporting. Your evolution of your workloads. So, in overall, there is a continuum spectrum, and depending on your data, you choose the right solution from the customer. So, in conclusion, what we talked about so far is storage strategy.

Must be aligned to AI workload requirements across the life cycle in terms of ingestion and the inferencing and agentic. There is no single right answer between on-prem, cloud, or hybrid. The discipline is knowing which parts of the workload belongs where. So from the next step's point of view, inventory your data gravity, look at the ownership, look at the requirements from compliancy, and then decide what is the right architecture you need to move. So in conclusion, hopefully this presentation has outlined the key differences between on-prem and cloud. based AI storage solutions and able to give you the understanding of the processing stages from the storage types, protocols, conceptual distinctions and the stakeholders that's involved in making the decision. The decision making flow provides practical tools for evaluating Selecting an appropriate solution again, take it as a guidance, it's not something prescriptive. So, with that, we have one more poll. Do you feel better equipped and prepared to make storage architecture decisions now? Of AI. It would be good to hear from you. What do you think you have gained information and is that helpful? Let us know. We did have a couple of questions come in, and one of them was: how long is it typical? How long is typical for training a model? And I'll just take that one because it depends. You know, how many perimeters are we talking about? How much training data? How many epics? You know, that's, you know, it really depends. So, to give you a timeframe, like you could do fine-tuning.

Which is fine-tuning a model in under an hour, depending on what you're doing, but training a model from scratch, weeks, if not months. A big model, you know, like a big, big model, one of the ones that just came out. And that's just training is just one part of it. So there's that. And then there's a question about Apache Cloud Stack, which I'm not very familiar with. Do either of you are either of you familiar with it? No. So we will definitely answer that question. Question when we come back in the QA blog. So apologies. Can't answer it right now. So I think the poll is over. Yep, poll is over. So that concludes. Thank you. Yeah, we're pretty much done. If there's any last-minute questions, let us know. Just give you one more second while we just, you know, here we are, QA. So if you're still here, please do rate the webinar. Provide us with your feedback. Slides are available at that link. Again, mention the QA, and then we will release that in like two weeks about. And then please also follow us on LinkedIn and on X. All right. Well, thank you, everyone. Thanks for attending. Have a great day.
