LF Live Webinar: Agentic AI in the Wild: Rethinking Trust When Your AI Has the Keys

Welcome everyone and thank you for joining us today. My name is Rachel Wen and I am the Outreach Vice Chair at the Competential Computing Consortium. We're very glad to have you with us for the session today, hosted by the Competential Computing Consortium, ahead of the Competential Computing Summit. In today's session, we're looking at a challenge that is moving fast across enterprise environments. AI systems are increasingly operating with greater autonomy, and the security models most organizations rely on were not built with that in mind. And we're going to explore what that means, where the gaps are. And what a more complete security architecture looks like in practice. And I'm so honored today to be joined by three industry leaders who have been working at the forefront of these topics for years. So, let me introduce our wonderful panelists. Our first panelist is Daniel Rohr from NVIDIA, and he is VP of Software Products. Security, architecture, and research at NVIDIA. In his 27 years at NVIDIA, he has led efforts to enhance AI security, verifiable workflows, deliver GPU competition computing, and advanced research efforts in secure platform design. Daniel has taken his integrated knowledge of everything in NVIDIA to shape security practices. Practices and explored novel cybersecurity solutions and help deliver some of the world's most advanced and trustworthy computing platforms. And he serves on the board of directors of Oasis Open and on NVIDIA's AI Ethics Review Committee. Danielle, welcome and thank you for joining us today.

And next, I would like to introduce Jesse Schrader from. Intel, who has been involved in computational computing since its earliest days. And he is principal engineer for data center and AI security at Intel. He has a long background of experiences as a practitioner in IT, cloud, and security domains, both at Intel and the US intelligence community. He was one of the Original pioneers of computational computing and a founding member of the CCC. He now leads go-to-market activities for Intel data cybersecurity technologies, including computational AI and post-quantum crypto. Jesse, it's so great to have you. Welcome. And I'm also very pleased to welcome Felix Schuster from Agile. Systems, who has helped bring competition computing from research into real-world deployment. And he is the CEO of Agile Systems and one of the pioneers who made computational computing actually usable and deployable at scale across industries. And he is a computer security researcher, turned startup founder after his PhD. At Microsoft Research working on the foundations of conference computing, he co-funded Agile Systems. And today, Agile Systems builds privacy infrastructure for the AI era. And they have products like Contrast Shield and the Kubernetes deployments with hardware-enforced computing, and also private mode AI. That brings that same guarantee for Gen AI inference. Felix, thank you so much for being here. Welcome. And I also want to thank you for all of you joining us today. We have a tremendous amount of expertise represented on this panel.

And before we get to the main discussion, let's start with a quick form of round to set the stage. In one sentence each, what is one thing about agentic AI security that more organizations should know? Let's go in alphabetic order by first name. And Daniel, we'll start with you and then Felix and Jesse. I think one of the critical things is. Is standard data protections still apply even in confidential computing? AI definitely has security challenges for its non-determinism, and Agentic makes it, autonomy makes it even more complicated in terms of its action. And clearly, establishing trust around the workload and the control over the data flows is. Probably the number one thing that you can perceive. Right, I go next. My perspective is it adds, Agentic is super powerful, but it also adds two new trust dependencies. A, you have to, you're adding the inference program. Provider to your trusted computing base. And B, the agent has its own, maybe not yet fully understood attack surface, like prompt injections. And I was at an event recently. And a claim was made that trust was actually more of a limiter to enterprise adoption of agentic AI than even the technology is. And, you know, I've spent most of my career as an IT practitioner. If there's one thing we're always looking for, it's. Predictability. And Agentic puts a real twist on that. And so it's not easy for IT to trust Agentic AI. And that's really where we're going to have to address if we want to see this thing actually move forward. Yeah, thank you for sharing.

And that gives us a very useful foundation to the first topic of this day, which is the state of Agent AI security. And look at where we are right now, right? And AgentiKAI is creating new opportunities for organizations, and it's automating complex workflows, accelerating decision making, and unlocking a lot of. New levels of productivity. And there have been like recent advances in long-running agents and agent framework that are enabling AI systems to operate with greater autonomy across enterprise environments. But these systems gain access to those sensitive data and then take on that more consequential actions. And the question Of how trust and governance and security must involve becomes more urgent. And that is the big picture shift that many organizations are navigating right now. So, let me start off with this first question. Agent TAI is moving rapidly from co-pilots to increasingly autonomous systems. Operating across enterprise environments. And as organizations who are embracing that shift today, what is the biggest assumption about security or trust that no longer apply, and what should we replace it? And, Jesse, you have been with the Competition Computing Consortium. The industry since its early days. So, would you like to take this one first? Sure. Yeah, I think, you know, being focused on confidential computing, one of the issues that we encounter a lot is this idea of thinking that encrypting. Data when it's at rest. My files, I open them up, but they're encrypted, controlled by keys.

That's enough, that I'm handling my data encryption because I'm encrypting it when it goes over the network or when it's in storage. And the reality is that that's not enough because when you unencrypt that file, And you bring it into memory, you are now processing it and it's in the clear. So, data in use is the next frontier of security and protection needs. And so it goes kind of hand in hand with this idea of. You know, just thinking that my perimeter defenses are going to be enough. And as long as I keep my data on-prem, and as long as I encrypt it when it's in storage, I've got myself covered. But that's really just how you cover yourself when you're not processing with something or when you're not doing something. But when it becomes Active, we need to protect it at that level. And that's, you know, that's where confidential AI really brings new and powerful capabilities to the playing field. Definitely. It's very well said. And Daniel, given your experience on secure platform design at NVIDIA, would you like? To chime in your perspectives as well? Yeah, I mean, I think dovetailing a little bit with what Jesse, you know, it's very much about the data, you know, and ironically, in agents, data is your code. And that sort of mental shift away from sort of the infra, the networking, and other layers, and how do we get trusted? Data. We need to know what code we're running. We've got that through attestations, signed containers, a lot of these sort of fundamental first principles to build out and verify the workload.

But now we're having to control for data that's coming into the system, measuring the intent of that data, especially when we're processing untrusted data. So the integrity of that operating environment is. Not just sort of a one-time thing, but sort of a continuous operation that we're having to build out and scaffold to not only establish trust, but maintain trust over time as these systems operate, which is a little different way of approaching. You know, we're used to look at sort of perimeter-based defenses, sort of network-established defenses. We're really looking at inside the AI workloads, how do we establish? Establish a new paradigm around securing these workloads. Definitely. And Felix, do you have anything to add on? I think the gentleman covered the confidential computing aspects pretty well. What I can reiterate is that, of course. You have this whole new attacked surface that is prompt injection or persuasion of the agent, etc. That has nothing to do with computer computing, but that also is, of course, an assumption or something that you did not have to consider so far. I think that's.

general general security consideration with regard to competition with regard to agentic workloads i think i think the lovely thing about confidential computing is it provides some tools and capabilities for generating the evidence to then make decisions about the operation of the system so there is there's continuity there but there's a last mile in terms of agent Design that is working through, which is where partners like Eslus and others are helping solve that last mile problem, I think, are really important in that ecosystem. I work from the infrastructure up and building sort of the primitives that need to be used, but composing those primitives is real work. Yeah, absolutely. And I'm building on that in traditional. Security was built around like protecting data arrests and data and use. But as AI systems become more autonomous and increasingly operate on sensitive data in real time, and the focus is shifting very quickly. And I'd love to hear your thoughts on this. How is the industry's focus shifting towards securing data in a competent way? And use. And Daniel, specifically, I think this connects directly to your work on verifiable workloads at NVDN. And what are your thoughts around that? Well, I have the what can we do today, and maybe what can we do in the future. I do think, especially when we're talking about these non-determinants, Of AI and agentic systems, having sort of evidence-based trust and how do we negotiate trust as sort of a first-order primitive, I think, is going to be increasingly important.

You know, we've got, you know, Felix observed, you know, hey, we've got this external model provider that we're bringing into our trusted community base. So I need some way to negotiate. Negotiate trust. You know, who is that model provider? Do I trust the provider? Where are they located? Sometimes there's data export requirements like, hey, I really need to do this went to a US region, not a China region or an EU region, because I have very strict data processing obligations to my partners and expectations that I need to adhere. So that very active negotiation of trust. I think it is going to be really important. I think CC and attestation and sort of the chain of provenance that you can establish through those primitives really allows for rigorous, strong evidence to be presented to make those policy-based decisions. So I think we've got all the pieces and all the tools there, but realizing that vision is going to require sort of a A whole ecosystem effort from AI agent workload deployment, from infrastructure providers, from hardware providers. You know, when we look at the ecosystem now, we've got CPUs, we've got GPUs. When we scale out to whole data center scale, like training workloads or even just very large frontier models, now we're inducing networks. We're doing data center to data center trust. So there's a lot of pieces that are still sort of actively being built out there in just the app layer. Most of the infrastructure is there. That's the solved problem. It's that trust, building trust, that's the work of a lot of us to get done. Yeah.

What I'd like to add here is: if or when agentic workloads become more prevalent within businesses, they will certainly handle lots of sensitive data. Not just personal data, but also business. Secrets, API keys, credit cards, etc. And of course, depending on your choice of inference provider, the inference provider is going to see at one point all of the data that your agent is handling, right? The agent needs a brain, and the inference provider is providing that brain, and that data. Being processed in plain text. Now you have two choices or three choices: run everything on-prem, you can do that, or you can just trust your inference provider, or three, you can use remote attestation and runtime encryption that are given by competent digital computing to have a more trustworthy. And maybe more reliable inference solution. Definitely well said. And Jesse, and as one of the pioneers for accomplished computing, what's your observation on the industry's shift? Yeah, you know, I think one of the things that. Has been shifting is that IT and application developers, they rarely think about what sits below the OS layer because that's typically their point of interface with the platform, with the system. But security is only As good and only as strong as the layer below it. And so we're finding, you know, it's every day you see a new CVE come out and it's some sort of vulnerability sitting somewhere in the stack, right? And so we are recognizing, and there is a shift to recognize that. Security really needs to be anchored at the lowest levels of the platform.

And then you can build a chain of trust up from that. But you really have to start at that foundation where the hardware is, where the silicon is. And so I think we're starting to see more recognition that that is. That needs to be more visible and more understood of exactly what the building blocks, like Daniel was talking about, the building blocks that the infrastructure providers are creating that can be built atop. And so I'm noticing more talk about some of those. Those low-level capabilities that maybe we had seen in the past. Yeah, for sure. And I really like some of the points that you would touch upon, right? Like, kind of building that entire ecosystem takes effort, and which is kind of contradictory to some of the words that we've been hearing, like maybe from some other conferences today, and a lot of those conversations. Stay focused on like model behavior and access controls. But from, I think, the takeaway from all three of you just now was that the deeper problem is not just agent behavior, it is also the environment that agent runs in. And as we're seeing, autonomous AI workloads are executing continuously across cloud. Infrastructure that organizations do not fully own or control, and sitting below a trust hierarchy that includes hypervisors, host operating systems, and cloud operators. And so, that traditional security was built, like assuming that infrastructure is trustworthy. However, for agentic AI processing sensitive data with no human In a loop, that assumption is just no longer acceptable.

So, for the next kind of a couple or 10 minutes or so, and I'd love to talk about the trust boundary, kind of really build on the conversation you just had, and then really kind of look into why software controls alone cannot get there. And then, so I would like to open this question to all of you. Like, where do you see the biggest trust risks emerge? And what is this potential impact? And how should organizations approach verifying the security of environments, their AI? Runs in. Someone want to jump on that? I mean, I think it's certainly a significant first step before really launching any significant production workload. I dovetail a lot. A little bit on Jesse's last comment of the trusted computing base and what's in and outside of that, really being attentive to that boundary. The lovely thing about competition computing is it allows you to collapse it really around sort of the workload that you're most interested in and exclude a lot of the infrastructure. So it removes a lot of supply chain risk, not all of it. You can absolutely. Do yourself a disservice by building the wrong thing inside the box. We can't save you from yourself. If you put buggy or malicious code inside the box, you're going to have a bad experience. But, you know, harking back to my previous comment: data is code, and data that's going into those agents needs to be carefully managed and understanding the untrusted. The influence of that untrusted data and how your agent operates, what credentials it has access to are all part and parcel of building that out.

And again, establishing that trust and visibility inside the box about the intent and operation of that agent is going to be sort of a first-order primitive for the IT operators of the future to really be able to manage those systems. I'll just kind of maybe give an example. I think there's several vulnerabilities or potential vectors of attack that do target agentic workloads. And one of probably the big ones is in this. Area around agent impersonization or spoofing, right? Where I think I'm talking to one agent, I'm exchanging data and trusting it to take a next set of actions. And I don't realize that I'm actually, you know, that connection is being spoofed or. Or something. And so I'm not talking to who I think I'm talking to. And this is really part of what I think of as a two-way zero trust model, which is not only the endpoint needing to be confirmed as having access into some service, but also the endpoint needs to be able to validate that the service. it's connecting to or one agent connecting to another agent is in fact valid and has not had its integrity compromised or been manipulated in some way. And so confidential computing, remote attestation and independent attestation is a primary capability of confidential computing. And that it provides for agentic workloads. So that, you know, when Agent B basically, before it acts on agent A's output, right, that's coming to it, Agent B can request an attestation report from Agent A. And if the attestation fails, Fails, then agent B refuses that message, right?

And so, in that way, you're making sure that you know exactly who you're talking to in real time, right? This is in runtime. That's a powerful tool in order to be able to trust these agents as they're interacting with. Each other without human oversight in real time. Definitely. And then, Felix, anything you would like to add on this item? No, I think everything covered. Thanks. Yeah, definitely. And that covers a lot of ground on where the risk actually. Emerge. And at the same time, it raises another question: like, if these are the risks, then why can the security tools most teams already have in place catch them? And I think that a lot of audience probably are asking a question: like, where do software-based security controls reach their limits in this context? And what does that mean? mean for teams working within those constraints. And Felix, I think you have a lot of experience on deployment and runtime security. And would you like to take this one first? Of course. I mean, we've been talking a lot about confidential computing here already. And the single difference that confidential computing can make here, or the biggest difference, is that it can isolate your workloads from the infrastructure. Software can't do that on its own, right? You can, what you can do with confidence computing. Here is you can isolate both your execution, the execution environment of your agent from the infrastructure, and you can isolate the AI model, like the brain of the agent. And both are very interesting.

However, maybe the former Like protecting and isolating the agent environment from the infrastructure is a bit less explored and maybe even more interesting in some regard. Like currently, if you think about agentic systems like OpenClaw, many people will have used OpenClaw, people typically Run that on their own machines. Because people have been buying Mac, Minis, et cetera, because they know OpenClaw is dealing with sensitive data and it may handle this data in weird ways. So better isolated. And well, people have to some extent. run these environments in the cloud. Now what you can do is, and with confident digital computing, you can isolate, you can have the best of both worlds. You can have something that has that has the security posture of an on-prem system combined with the convenience of a cloud-based system. Like running an open claw in a confidential computing environment, in a cloud, with remote attestation, that can go a long way. And software alone can't do that. And it is a great alternative to buying a Mac Mini in some regard. Maybe I'll just add something. You know, I think a real key ingredient for trust is having provable forensics. We have to build, you know, software can say, I'm operating correctly, but how do I know that it's not? Just telling me that? How do I know that it is, in fact, spoofed by something else and it thinks it's operating correctly, but there's something going on underneath, right? We have this question a lot of how do I know? I need to be able to have something that proves it. And so by looking at some of these.

Lower level platform capabilities, what they're able to do is provide basically an independent view of what's happening at that software layer and an independent control over that. So that when the software says, this is who I am, there's something outside of it that. I can say, yes, that's actually true. You can trust that. And here's the forensic proof. Here's the cryptographic proof that you can validate independently and prove it. And so I think that's an outside view and a kind of a cryptographic forensic type view. Of what software is doing becomes key for establishing trust. I think that plays in two directions. It's not just sort of the post hoc attribution of actions made by an agent. Sometimes there's a lot of like, oh, the agent did a weird thing. Who can investigate and tell me why did it do that? That post hoc analysis is really interesting, but the evidence to drive sort of real-time policy enforcement, also, I think, is very powerful. And we're seeing new paradigms of like, you know, sandboxing by itself isn't sufficient. There's this sort of data input/output semantic that's also being driven, and that same evidence can be used in that policy enforcement layer as well to make sure that. The agent is behaving within sort of the normative range of your expected workflow, which is defined. So, another good utility of that, the dual use of that data that's provided. Yeah, for sure. And then, and so far, like, we have pretty much kind of talked a lot of the.

Aspect and have a clear picture of where the gaps are, and then why they're so hard to close with software at law. And for those of you in the audience today, now you must be wondering: what is the complete answer here, right? And when we talk about securing AI agents, and we're really talking about multiple layers of trust, and which way. Was kind of mentioned by Daniel, Felix, and Jesse, and from a variety of perspectives. And from computational containers as a deployment layer to hardware rooted trust and attestation at CPU level, and of course, to GPU-side protection where Agent DI workloads naturally run. So that naturally. Lead to the question I like to pose to the panel. If trust and verifiability are foundational requirements for Agentic AI, then what does a complete trust architecture look like in practice? And why is it so important to extend that trust boundary across both GPUs and CPUs? And Daniel, again, your leadership on GPU computing, what are your thoughts and vision here? I mean, certainly agents are heavily leveraging, I think, both CPU and GPU, right? The model is clearly running at Scale on the GPU, but the orchestration and policy enforcement and a lot of the data in and out is managed on the CPU cluster. So, certainly managing the transactions across two TEs and binding them together, negotiating that bilateral trust is a really important first principle. You can readily see that extending from the local agent to groups of agents.

Interaction, often in an enterprise, we'll have multiple agents interacting, but we also have agents outside the organization. An agent calling a sales force agent, and how do I negotiate that trust and the credentials that exchange, the privacy and data controls that exchange, and that sort of. A stepping up of trust at every successive layer, I think, is going to be very much a first principle. And it's supported very directly by the attestation and the chain of consequence that we can derive from that on both CPU and GPU. And in the future, very likely the network layer as well will be brought into that sort of thing when we think about data center scale. Intel, we're going to have to start inducing other elements into that trusted computing base using the same sort of CC primitives into the future. And Intel has been a great partner in making sure those CPU-GPU interactions, as we see today, are super efficient. A lot of the improvements in PCIe, network encryption, and things are all sort of building to that, where CC is. Just the default, and now it's the trust engineering on top that is the work that's ongoing because the hardware and the primitives are all there. And Jesse, Felix, anything you would like to add on to that? No, I mean, I think, Daniel, really. Hit it. You know, you're almost always going to have many agents involved, and agents go through a very iterative process. And there's, you know, that's the setup and orchestration, and there's the reasoning, and there's the execution and governance.

And so there's lots of different types of Types of compute happening through that process and between all of those agents. And some of that compute runs super efficiently on GPU, and some of that compute runs super efficiently on CPU. So, by definition, you're going to have, especially if you want to run in an efficient way, you're going to have a lot of action happening on both and a lot of Communication between them. And, you know, one of the things that we've noticed in the cybersecurity realm is, you know, attackers are always looking for where's that next point of vulnerability. So if we get a nice trusted execution environment on the CPU and a nice trusted execution environment on the GPU, but their communication. Communicating over a bus that's unsecure, well, guess where the attackers are going to look, right? That's going to be that next place. And certainly, there's inefficient ways of passing data back and forth between those two things. But if that slows things way down, then we don't have a very effective system. Anymore. So we need to be able to protect all of the steps along the chain, but we also need to be able to protect them in an efficient way or, you know, this becomes an untenable workload. So that's our challenge. Felix, any perspective on that? I think Jesse is right. I mean, they have been quite some attacks that made headline news. And the challenge is not, well, these attacks, for example, they can be prevented. The challenge is: can they be prevented at the performance cost that people? Are willing to pay.

And yeah, I think the industry is making good progress on hitting the right spot on the spectrum. We're on the third generation now, and the efficiencies have gotten substantially better with every successive generation, as well as larger, more complex models, right? So they're really chasing the frontier boundary of A. And agentic workloads to make sure that they stay sort of in that envelope of performance expectations. And it's been really interesting to see the ecosystem surround that problem. Absolutely. As someone running an in-production confidential AI inference service, I can say that NVIDIA hardware is in confidential computing mode, is great at delivering performance. Performance that customers cannot tell apart from, most of the time, not tell apart from non-confidential performance. And that's a great achievement, which one of the things that we're doing. Which begs the question: why aren't you using it already? That's right. Get ready for the cavalcade of customers, Felix. We said it here, like it's red, you should just use it all the time. Yeah, well, it's absolutely right. You're, if we're, you know, we've been doing a very good job of removing those barriers to entry, right? And so at some point, it just becomes a why not instead of what am I going to have to do? It's a why wouldn't I? Yes. Absolutely, and that's very helpful. And because it really kind of gives us an audience a good guidance of like what a trusted architecture looks like, like end-to-end, and what they can do today and inform many organizations listening today.

And then I'm pretty sure their next question is probably understand like how do they, you know, how do they get started? It into practice. And Felix, kind of build on what you just mentioned, like given your experience, right, building a lot of deployment tools for computing, you probably have something to say on this topic. And Daniel, Jesse, feel free to chime in as well on this topic. Yeah. So, it really depends what you want to do. There are ready-to-use confidential AI inference services from my company, from other companies. So, you can use those as building blocks and then start building your own augentic confidential environments or rely on someone else. Confidential environments. I think let's say you want to build your own confidential agent environment and not your, well, yeah, you would probably want to do this on Kubernetes. And there is a great open source project out there that's called Confidential Containers. And that is. A very good starting point if you want to deploy something that is potentially can be production ready. The project is maintained by a broad set of experts. People from our company contribute as well. And that would be a very good starting point. I think all three of our companies contribute there. And it turns out a lot of AI workloads are container-shaped for better or worse. And removing that barrier to adoption for people, building out AI workloads and staying in that ecosystem that we're already comfortable with, I think is a huge enabler for those who don't want to translate their workloads.

And we're always thoughtful about, even when we first built out C. See, like, what is the minimal amount of code that needs to be introduced to lift it from a non-CC to a CC use case? And the Katakoko contributions in particular have been really nice in that way and making it very easy for folks to translate workloads. Yeah, just at a real practical level, you know, how do people get into this? I mean, the The thing to understand is with things like Coco, there is common edge computing enablement that has to happen at the OS and hypervisor level, and of course, in the infrastructure. But the container development and application development is native. So you don't have to change. The way you're doing, you know, how you're developing it or anything like that to be able to access these capabilities. You need them provided from your hosting provider, and kind of at the foundational level, you need the components there. But as an app developer, you don't have to do things in a completely Different way, and one of the things that we know is that you know, containers traditionally have kind of been notorious for being a little soft in the isolation between containers, right? That's that's long been sort of a concern, um, compared to a VM, yes, compared to a VM, exactly, and and so as. Adding this confidential computing capability onto, say, like Kubernetes with Coco is really helping to draw or provide a stronger isolation between containers that can be more trusted, especially for sensitive workloads. Yeah, absolutely.

I think this is especially practical for teams that are already working in cloud-native environments with Kubernetes and for those they want to adopt like containers in practice and also look into further attestation. And so, definitely, thank you for sharing that perspective. And I understand, like, all three of you, and it. Coming from really diverse in background experience. And then all three of you are in your organization that are part of the Compture Computing Consortium as well. So I want to zoom out for a moment into the broader industry picture because technology and tooling are an important part of the story. And at the same time, an open Standards and vendor neutral frameworks are also what makes this accessible at scale, regardless of what cloud and hardware stack an organization that is running on. So, I'd love to kind of spend some of the time talking about why open standards and vendor neutrality matters and what practical frameworks. Steps look like for organizations who want to move forward. And I want to open this one to all three of you. And what are your thoughts on open vendor-neutral standards? Like, why does it matter so much? And what breaks down if every cloud provider or hardware vendor or software vendor solves this. Independently rather than collaboratively. I can jump in there, I guess, first. I mean, I think thematically, what we've seen just in the course of this conversation, maybe more readily apparent to those of us who live in it, is that this is sort of a An ecosystem-wide challenge, right?

There are pieces that live up in the AI stack, there's stuff in the containers, there's stuff in the operating system. You know, the CPU and GPU are interacting over a secure channel on PCIe. Without standardization, it is incredibly difficult to collaborate at that kind of scale. Right. And if we really wanted to realize this vision, and I think Intel and NVIDIA and AMD for their part in their version were all very invested early in this process to make sure that this technology that we believed in strongly was as pervasively available as possible, which meant very direct collaboration of standards like EATS and RATs and. Others really provide a solid foundation for how do we interact and exchange this super useful attestation data that we've all been talking about over and over again, and make it standardized and really easy to operate over and make the trust negotiations that are all very necessary. And I think that's foundational because making access to compute, I think, is in all our interests. That's what we desire to do. And putting that up as a barrier to like silo when we very clearly need to be collaborating just feels the opposite of what we're about. Yeah, definitely well said. And Jesse and Felix, in any perspective from your end? You know, as every vendor wants to have differentiation, of course, right? And especially in the very early phases of a new technology, there does tend to be a lot of differences between how different vendors are doing it as they step into. To the market.

But, you know, the whole principles of cloud really break down if you have to have a million different versions so that you can work on every possible piece of hardware and every possible software stack and keep track of them all and constantly be modifying. As each one develops sort of separately with a separate set of capabilities. It's just, it's not scalable. And so we recognize that as we get more and more established as a capability and as a market, we're going to need to converge on some, you know, some common ways of doing things because that really. It's that rising tide is going to float all the boats involved. And I think that's really where we are right now. And so we see all the main players here, certainly all of us on the line and others as well, are heavily involved in establishing standards for how to do this consistently. Across domains. Yeah. As an ISV, I certainly want to see standardization on the hardware layer. Like, I don't want to write specific code for Intel, AMD, NVIDIA, et cetera, all the time. Of course, we have to do that, but I think There has been a good baseline of how or a common understanding of how things should work. And we are on a good path to making these things compatible. And I think with respect to Agentic too, we're seeing standardization, not just sort of at the heart. For a level, but sort of AI down as well.

You know, there was work, ironically, what is it, SIGSTOR under Linux Foundation OpenSSF started, but got adopted over into COSI, Consortium for Security under OASIS, two different coalitions, all trying to solve common problems, but they did like model signing and skill signing. Again, building that evidence and provenance of trust built. But this very real motion, I think, across the ecosystem and multiple players in multiple disciplines, really trying to standardize and make sure adoption of AI, adoption of Gentic, adoption of confidence is as smooth and straightforward and frictionless as we could possibly make. And it's really lovely to see that. That level of collaboration across huge, huge players in the industry, which you would commonly, I think, outside in, just look at as direct competitors. And in these cases, in particular, very clear alignment on how do we enable these technologies. Yes, absolutely. And I'll add my brief perspective as Outreach Committee Vice Chair from. The Computer Computing Consortium. And then you're absolutely right. Like companies, there have been so many multiple players in the industry. And then companies operate across multiple clouds, multiple hardware platforms, and increasingly complex supply chains. And open vendor-neutral standards help create that common foundation for trust and also. Drive the standardization and they enable interoperability, portability, and consistency.

So that's one of the reasons that CCC brings together cloud providers and hardware vendors, software companies, and end users and research institutions and etc. to collaborate on those common approaches. That can really benefit the broader ecosystem in industry rather than like creating those isolated solutions. And so, we really appreciate Erebon's contributing into driving the adoption of country-community technology and do what's best for the industry. And then, so far, we have had pretty great perspectives. Open standards and vendor neutral frameworks. We've also talked about from the very beginning, right, the technology, the architecture, and the importance of the consortium and open standards. So, I'd love to get your advice now for the organizations listening today if they Want to contribute to the ecosystem, prepare for a future with more autonomous AI systems. What is the first practical step that they should take right away? I think a good start would be to make the decision to use confidential computing from day one. It's a great technology as we've learned for agentic workloads. And if you are starting fresh, there's no good reason to not consider competential computing initially already. That would be my advice here. And Felix is maybe not promoting his own services. But I think one thing that I would say is: if you're starting brand new, you've never worked with this technology before, there are people who have built out patterns for you that you can leverage very directly as a starting point.

You may find that you evolve and need something a little more nuanced. But if you're just coming out of the gate, all the major cloud providers have solutions. There are SaaS-level services from folks like Eslos and others who can help you on your journey. And I would definitely tap into those. Engaging a lot of the CC vendors in that consortium, I think, can give you a big leg up and help accelerate your adoption. If you're going. Not just for CC, but just Agentic, right? A lot of them are solving really fundamental trust problems in that Agentic space as well. Yeah, I often advise customers to look for what I call I can't scenarios. In other words, I would like to migrate to the cloud, but I can't. Because I've got this sensitive data that we have a policy to keep it on-prem. Or I'd like to be able to train models across this wider data set, but I can't because regulatory requirements require blah, blah, blah. And so any of these spaces where transformation. within your organization is held up by an I can't, there's a very good chance that confidential AI would address that thing that is that roadblock. And what ends up happening out of that is you actually remove data silos and you open up your opportunity. So it's a very important area to look, especially when you're trying to start somewhere. That's a good place to start. Awesome. And we have some time. Oh, go ahead. Sorry, Daniel. I was going to say, and maybe one just footnote here: for those who haven't heard about CC or are just hearing about it. This isn't like a thing that just happened.

It's been going on for some years, you know, and it is on our third generation of CC. Intel has been doing it even longer. And there's a lot of mass. And, you know, I called out every CSP has CC now. There's a lot of mass here, and that this isn't going to go away tomorrow. Like, if you adopt this today, There's not any real risk that, like, this technology is like, oh, this is just a flash in the pan, this is going to go away tomorrow. Investing now will only help you in the future. So, learning about this technology, I think, is something that I would strongly encourage, especially as Jesse so clearly highlights: you know, there are these bunch I can't scenarios, and there are new ones coming up, especially. Around trust and Agentic and how we build out these systems. These tools can be instrumental in overcoming real barriers for adoption of these tech of other technologies that your company depends on right now. So, really encourage you to sort of dive in and learn more because I think it can be really powerful for you. And very well said on those guidance and advice. And we have time for. One final wrap-it round, and I would like to give each of you a moment to leave the audience with one last thought. Let's go with the reverse alphabetic order and start with Jesse, then Felix, and Daniel this time. What is one final comment or piece of advice you would like to leave with the audience? I think maybe I would say. You know, the first killer app for confidential computing was the cloud, because by definition, data owners, app owners didn't own the infrastructure.

And that's great. That continues to be a very valuable area. But I think that Agentic AI is really the first killer app. For the enterprise, on-prem, and hybrid environments. Because of the interactions, because of the non-determinism, because of all of the state that's held within the agent as it's working, those all become those areas of vulnerability and need to be protected. On-prem just as much as they do in the cloud. So I think that's really driving a new wave of demand in this space. And now that common Linux distros are fully enabled, and of course, hardware and all of the very Various platform vendors all have this capability. It really is now starting to be very broadly available for enterprise deployments and neoclouds and places like that. So I think it's a real strong area to focus on. Felix? Yeah, I'll keep it short. So, if you're building something agentic and have any sensitive data at all, you should consider confidential computing both for the environment the agent runs in and also for the inference. Daniel? Honing it even shorter, maybe, if you have. Haven't started down this path, start now. Pick one problem, any problem, because the learning you'll derive from that in the course of that process will inform and accelerate everything that follows, right? You know, there's a lot of reticence or people try to, you know, do, you know, transform the whole business. Doing that all at once, really challenging.

You have a lot of friction, a lot of Of things, find one area you can really dive into and invest in and learn rapidly, and then take that learning everywhere else in your organization. Thank you to Daniel, Felix, and Jesse for a thoughtful and insightful discussion. And this is exactly the kind of conversation the industry needs to be having as a Gentech AI becomes increasingly embedded into enterprise. Infrastructure. And thank you to everyone in the audience for joining us today. We encourage you to take the ideas we discussed today and begin exploring now how trust, attestation, and competition computing can fit into your own AI strategies and deployments. And if you'd like to continue the conversation and learn more, we hope to see. You at the Competition Computing Summit. And thank you again for all of your time and thank you all for joining us today. Now I'm passing things back to Linux Foundation Candice to close out the session. Thank you so much to our speakers for your time today and thank you everyone for joining us. As a reminder, this recording will be on the Linux Foundation's YouTube page. page later today. We hope you join us for future webinars and have a wonderful day.
