Alright, so let's get started. I just wanted to kick off the CXL micro-conference. If you haven't met me, my name is Adam Manzanares. I'm at Samsung. Dan Williams, Ben Widawsky, Davidlohr Bueso are also part of this micro-conference. I see Dan there. I see his face, but I'm looking at it. So, say hi, Dan. I just wanted to say hello, kind of kick off. From our side, I live in the aluminum world, right? But CXL interest is very high. It presents some interesting options for dealing with attaching memory to a system, as well as there's accelerator intricacies as well. So, it kind of opens up a world in some ways, right, of how to connect external devices that are cache coherent with the CPU. And so you get these flexible memory topologies. I want to say thanks to everyone for coming out here and listening to these talks and sort of learning about this ecosystem because it's fairly new. It's been talked about and there's been similar cache coherent things going on before, but it seems like the industry is coalescing around CXL. And I want to thank all of you for contributing and being a part of this. And I'd like to say that representation from as many people as possible is always good for ecosystem success. Part of this is for ecosystem. And today we have talks with people from Intel, Arm, AMD, Google, Samsung, right? So, at least we're getting representation, some broad representation now, which is great, right? So, we'll see. But, yes, I'm very hopeful, right, that the partition rate is pretty diverse at this point, which is great. And I just want to say for mailing list activity would always be good too, right? It's moving in a certain direction, but as many people could come in and chime in, right, you know, help out with reviews and get more eyes on it is always good, right, and being part of the discussions. And, you know, it is a known fact that hardware is limited availability at this point, right? And there's multiple pieces in this picture, right, the CPUs, the hardware, the devices themselves, right? But there are options out there, right? So, there's QEMU, and so I would say just reach out to people here, right? Talk to us about some of the options that you have and maybe we can talk about that. But there's QEMU, Dan has the CXL test for like mocking up CXL topologies in the Linux kernel too, right? So, you don't even have to leverage QEMU. And we're here now, so I just want to say like meet each other, discuss CXL, learn about use cases, you know, let's push the ecosystem forward and, you know, we spend the time in here, but, you know, reach out virtually as well. And so, yeah, you know, just participate and, you know, I'm glad to admit in the whole micro conference organizing media, we're kind of on the same page, let's all get together and the idea of stuff is like the more mailing list activity, right? Like I think Stephen said, like in the training for the movie, if we get more discussion on the mailing list, it says, hey, we talked about this at Plumbers, like that's a successful Plumbers, right? So, hopefully, hopefully this spurs more discussion from others. And so, I'll get out of the way here and our first presenter is Ramon. And so, let me just give him the.
