SNIA SDC 2025 - Discussion and Analysis of the MLPerf Storage Benchmark Suite and AI Storage Workloads

Hey everyone, I'm Wes. I'm going to be talking about MLPerf storage and then some future AI storage workload benchmarks that are under development. And why it's hard. So I've got sort of two big sections that I'm going to go through. The first is going to be the existing MLPerf storage workloads. I'll go through them pretty high level. I've talked about them multiple times in the past. I've got a bunch of stuff that I've written about, like the checkpointing workload. And then I'm going to spend more time on challenges in developing the next two sets of workloads, which in my view are vector search and kv cache and trying to figure out how do we benchmark these in a way and how do we define benchmarks that we can have everyone run and put on a leaderboard. And have the numbers on that leaderboard make sense when you're comparing one versus the other. It's that second part that makes things really, really hard because you really need to sort of tighten your focus. A little bit about myself. So I've been at Micron for about 10 years, mostly in performance engineering, did some of that before I was at Micron. Dell databases, storage arrays, software-defined storage. And I've been focused on AI and storage for AI workloads for the past six years, seven years. Time flies. I've actually been running Benchmark Slow for 27 years because, like any normal child, I started. With overclocking and benchmarking my own system, and then for slightly less than 27 years, actually maintaining benchmark leaderboards on one of the popular overclocking sites of the time.

I don't know if anyone else here actually remembers when a lead pencil was a primary overclocking tool. You would change. The resistance of your pull-up resistors to change voltage. The good old days, right? So, benchmarks get used in a lot of ways. They're used for product development, used for validation testing, sizing hardware requirements, used for purchasing decisions, and for performance leaderboards, which is sort of the big thing that we talk about here, which is trash talk with rules, right? So MLPerf storage is one of those leaderboards and benchmarking storage for AI has two really big hurdles. That we need to overcome. The first one is that AI systems require AI accelerators, and AI accelerators are very, very expensive. If we're just trying to understand what storage requirements are for AI workloads, needing to deploy tens of tens Hundreds of accelerators is extremely impractical. So we need a method where we don't need all of these accelerators to be able to test out scaling of AI systems for storage. Another big problem is that data sets that are publicly available are small. They are getting better. So I was recently looking, and we can get up into like the 5 terabyte space with publicly available data sets. But if we look at something like the Critio click log data set, this is used for training recommendation systems. The download for this is about a terabyte of TSV files, and when you process it to go into the model, you're down to 300. Gigabytes, which from a storage perspective is tiny. This starts getting into the domain of that can fit in HBM.

When we look at what someone in the industry who uses a lot of recommendation systems, so Meta, has talked about in one of their papers, they said that training recommendation jobs would read on the order. Of 25 or more petabytes of data per training run. And that was in 2021. So I doubt they've decided to use less data. That's a 100x difference between what we can do from an easy benchmarking perspective and what we actually see happening in the industry. So, ML Commons has a bunch of different benchmarks, training, inference, et cetera, for the different parts of the AI pipeline. One of the difficulties, though, is that those different ones are going to remove storage dependencies because they really want to focus on compute. And it makes sense to do that, but as a storage person, it kind of hurts me on the inside because, hey, we're important, right? So, MLPurse storage. Storage was developed to address that gap. And what it sets out to do is develop the tools so that we can emulate real AI compute on traditional CPU-based servers, so that we don't need to be spending all the money on AI systems, and also give us the ability to generate large artificial data sets with similar characteristics to the real data sets, so, like distribution of file size. Sizes, size of samples, number of samples, per file, et cetera. Before one of you asked me whether or not it will do compression and dedupability, no. We know it should do that. We know code exists in FIO to do that, but trying to merge that into what we're doing with DLIO and MLP store. There's just a gap.

So, if anyone is really passionate about writing that code and contributing that, we would very much appreciate your contributions to ML Perk Storage to make it even more representative of the real world. ML Perk Storage has published three sets of results so far. Each version is a definition of how to run the benchmarks in a way that can be compared across. Vendors and solutions with specific workload configurations. Version 0.5 and 1.0 were training in just only, and in 2.0, which was just published right before FMS, we added checkpointing of large language models. And like I said, benchmark leaderboards is trash. Talk with rules. Micron's the only SSD vendor with submissions in all three rounds. So it's been fun to work with the group for as long as we have. I'm gonna go through the training and checkpointing slides pretty quick. I had expected to spend more time on this, but one of the upsides and downsides of going on Wednesday. Is you get a whole bunch of presentations that you get to watch before, which means you get a change if you want to. It does also mean that some of my slides are going to be a surprise to me because I was finishing them around midnight last night. So we'll do this together. It's. Yeah. So the training and checkpoint. Workloads both use the tool DLIO developed by Argonne National Labs. Wee Hozang, actually sitting in front here, is in this room at 10:35 going over DLIO and performance and benchmarking. If you have specific questions about what DLIO is doing under the hood, he will be the right person to ask.

I can answer a lot of those questions, but he will absolutely know more. On the training side, we define three models for training ingest that are data-intensive. In a case that's not obvious, LLM training is not currently data-intensive. So, this is not one of the training. Workloads. The training workloads that we have are Unit3D, ResNet50, CosmoFlow. So it's a medical imaging, image classification, and HPC workload. We define size of samples, number of samples, sample rate, etc. And I have a few different traces that I'm going to go through a couple metrics for. The intent of these was to get them to look similar from an intensity perspective. So each data set was 1.3 terabytes and roughly 5 to 6 gigabytes a second of throughput. I've talked about this before, so if you search for like BASCIMOPERF training, you will find presentations online. The first thing is the transfer size histogram. All of these workloads are doing large samples of 128 kilobytes or larger. And the big thing to take away from this is that the actual container format, so sitting sort of at the file system layer, affects what the transfer-size histogram looks like. So one of the workloads is using serialized NumPy arrays, the other two are using TensorFlow TF records. Records result in 4K I/Os at 20% of the I/Os. I would say for most of us, that's unexpected. We don't realize that we're going to have a bunch of small sort of metadata lookup operations, but they exist, and it can absolutely mess up a workload that we thought was going to be 100% large block.

The next thing is looking at Q depth histograms. So, just a reminder: Qdepth is a result of parallelism in a system. It's not a tunable in the application. And each of these workloads has similar intensity from a throughput perspective. They're all doing primarily large I/O. And to do this, we trace the submission and completion times at the NVMe layer. We map everything out to know how many were in flight when we submitted something. And then each of these plots is the percent of IOs that were submitted at that position in the queue. Okay? The top one on the right. Yep. Can we add two actions? Yeah. That was the mean of the top plot. This is 100% read. Right. 100% read, no writes, no checkpointing, just the data ingest. Multiple epochs, five epochs, so we're reading the same data multiple times. Uh memory is small enough that uh file system cache does not have a large effect. Random ones and zeros. Like KV caching and ways that we might implement that without actually doing KV caching, that really comes into play with that compressibility is going to be important. So, again, that's a huge opportunity. Yep. Just a little minor for the video stream for some questions. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Thank you. It was understood by Bell Plus, but I'm not sure. Yeah, so that was a question about whether or not it's read-only and whether or not the data is randomly generated or if it's generating FP8s and trying to generate data that is more representative of the actual data. Okay, so the top one's unit 3D. Nice normal bell curve.

Generally, what we would expect: moderately high Q depth, tail on the left, tail on the right. ResNet 50, medium Qdep, super long tail out to a Q depth of 700. And that was not an individual spike of 700. We see this consistently across the execution run. The bottom one is CosmoFlow. Which is absolutely one of my favorite plots. I think this is the right audience to be able to say I have a favorite plot. This is one of them. Like, this is extremely complex behavior that's giving us a multimodal distribution of Qdeps. I would really love to just be able to spend the time to dive in and figure out what each of these peaks is due to, but unfortunately. Due to time, I have not been able to do that. But what this is showing is that the training workloads, which we think should be simple because we're just feeding data in and as large chunks of data, there's a lot of complexity and a lot of variation between the individual types of those training ingest workloads that we can do. All right, checkpointing. So, CD. Jay asked in his presentation yesterday whether or not anyone thinks that checkpointing is critical in the compute node. And there's some discussion back and forth on this. The first bit, though, checkpoints are big. A lot of times we're going to think about a model size and we have like Lama 8 billion, FP16, alright, 16 gigs, that's easy. Why is writing 16 gigabytes hard? Why is reading 16 gigabytes hard? One word, optimizer, a bunch of other stuff that goes into that.

But the optimizer state is basically how the parameters are moving when it's training, and those end up being really, really big. So if we're looking at a 400,000 Billion parameter model, that would be let's say 800 gigs. The optimizer state can be up to five terabytes, depending on sort of the specific implementation. The other problem that we have is that clusters fail. As they get bigger, they fail more. The important thing to know is that because we're still doing synchronous training, where Everything needs to be doing something at the same time, and then they're exchanging data, and then they do more work at the same time, and then they exchange data. A single failure results in the whole thing stopping and needing to pull back in. The failure rate then goes to the power of the number of components that can fail. So if we take the failure rate of GPUs, technically you take the success rate, so one minus the failure rate, and then you put it to the power of the number of GPUs in a system. That'll give you the estimated success rate for any given time period, and then one minus gives you the failure rate, right? So the plot is showing what is the mean time between failures of a cluster given a given cluster. Size. The specific inputs for this are from the Lama 3 paper because Meta gave a whole bunch of information about the types of failures that they saw, the frequency of failures, the amount of time that they trained, and the number of GPUs that they used.

So if you look at the bottom right corner of this, where we're looking at 100,000 GPUs, that gives us the mean time to fail. About 30% of the time. Minutes. So it's a problem. Now, there is a lot of research happening to say: how can we do this better than just writing a bunch of stuff to storage? How can we do better? How can we use memory? How can we do data distribution? But there's also this scale of folks that don't necessarily have all of that infrastructure. All of the AI engineers, and I think if you talk to John Michael from PharmGPU and the customers that he has, there are a lot of people doing this extremely naively that have budget to do it on relatively large clusters. So, in one sense, a lot of the customers that like CJ's talking to, they don't see this. As a problem because they've got an engineering budget to throw at it to fix it and do things in a way that's a lot more intelligent. On the other hand, because of the prevalence of AI and the number of people that can do things with it that don't have the engineering budgets to throw it doing this in an optimal manner from an infrastructure perspective, it can still be a problem. The workload that we have, we define. Four different model sizes, and for each one, it's basically the size of the model, the optimizer state, and then a minimum number of processes that is going to be needed to actually do that checkpoint. That number of processes is basically representative of how many GPUs do you reasonably need to do training. So, if you're using the 405 billion parameter model, you need about 500.

GPUs to reasonably train a 400 billion parameter model, probably more than that. So we're going to say that you need 512 process to actually dump this checkpoint, which is going to be about 5.5 terabytes. On the taking a checkpoint side, we create the checkpoint in memory. Flush it out to disk, and then we do an FS sync call. That's not generally how people are going to do it in the real world. You're going to try to distribute that more asynchronously across the time between checkpoints, but that is kind of a pointless benchmark. Like, you need a number that you can measure, so you have to do an FS sync so that we can measure how long this takes, and we can see what that load looks like. On the read side, though, that's way more representative. So, when you're saving a checkpoint, you've got a lot of time to do it between checkpoints. But when you're needing to load a checkpoint, every single second that you're waiting for that checkpoint to hit your GPUs is seconds that your GPUs are just sitting there waiting. So, that is completely into your TCO model. The one big call out on this is that this is another one where we like to think that this is a trivial workload because we're just doing really big reads or really big writes. The thing that gets interesting is it is a DDoS attack. We're going to get hundreds to thousands of threads all hitting your storage to read something or write something at the same time. same time.

Naive implementations can absolutely saturate your storage and as soon as those Qdufs go up and you start dropping IOs because you're timing out, that's where problems can come in. So it's the scale of this that turns it into a hard problem or at least a problem that needs to be managed more intelligently than most of the storage things that we're doing. Okay, so those are the two workloads that exist. We've got results published. You can go to the ML Commons website and check those out. Feel free to talk to me afterwards if you have questions about those workloads. I can talk about them for hours and hours, and I don't think I'm even exaggerating. Yeah. On the workload with the checkpoint workload. Yesterday, the CPU was talking about the debugger that was loading checkpoints. Does this um the team test devotees on writing and loading checkpoints? It does writing and loading. Uh the loading is sorry, yes, thank you. Um the question Was AMD yesterday presented on the complexities of checkpointing and specifically the checkpointing, the complexity and loading checkpoints. And the question is whether or not this does loading and storing of checkpoints. It does. Now, on the loading side, we don't do that level of complexity. So if I recall, I did not see his presentation yesterday, but I I saw the short version at FMS. One of the specific complexities with checkpoints is: let's say you've got a thousand GPUs, 1,024 specifically, and you're going to write out the model and optimize your state. That checkpoint aligns to the parallelism strategy that you used with your GPUs.

So let's say one of your data parallel. Instances dies, and you have to drop down to 768 GPUs, and you have enough memory to kick off training, and you want to load that checkpoint. That load now is a fundamentally different process because it was originally based off of, well, we had a thousand GPUs that each wrote this, but now we don't have a thousand GPUs to load it back in. So check out that recording. There's a lot of great work going around. On that. And that's one of those areas where sort of predicting failures lets you sort of change your training structure. If you see that you might have a GPU failing, what you want to do is when you get to the end of a batch, do a checkpoint and then drop that data parallel. Instance out, reload from that checkpoint and continue training without having the actual failure hit you, and then you can do work on that system. So there's places where this can come in. There's a lot of optimizations that can happen. Whether or not those need to go under the benchmark, I don't know. If someone thinks that they do, please let us know. I think that's interesting work. Vector databases. The first thing that I want to show here, and there was a bunch of good talks on vector databases already. Vector databases are not just rag. So the main thing to think about with a vector database is we're going to take data, and this can be unstructured data, it can be text, it can be images, it can be. V video, and we're going to feed it through an embedding model.

This is a model that is trained to take this data and create a vector where that vector space represents the contextual information that we want to get out of this data. In the reg use case, what this is doing is showing that if we have a sentence talking. About the complexities in checkpointing, and another document that's talking about how to load checkpoints, those are contextually similar, such that if we have one, we want to be able to find the other. Now, there's also use cases, let's say, fraud detection. You had someone that made a transaction that you later on found out was fraudulent. So, you take all of the details of About that, you can start training your model. And now, when you have a transaction come in from a user and it looks similar to this suspicious transaction, you can flag this quickly for probably a deeper look because they are near each other in this contextual vector space, right? So the AI aspect of this. Is developing this embedding model to take the context that is meaningful from the data that you're using and create a vector space so that you can find these contextually similar things. LLMRAG is the easiest one and is probably one of the more widely deployed, but recommendation systems and fraud systems are much. bigger in terms of the individual size of a database. The amount of data that we want to be able to throw at these systems for recommendations or fraud is big. I mean based on the work that we've done, like do we have any sense of the kind of sizes of some of these vector databases of some of the bigger customers? We have hints.

We have hints. So no one is really, sorry, the question is: do we know how big these are? How big are the vector databases that customers are using? So, trying to remember, I think it was Microsoft that has a paper talking about specifically doing billion vector indexes. Search and then the paper is saying we successfully did this. So they saw it as a problem to get up to billion at least that they wanted to talk about. I think it's easy to assume that they wanted to do at least an order of magnitude above that. Pretty easy to assume two orders of magnitude. Now, how we're managing 100 billion vectors is a hard problem. Problem, and I'm sure that hyperscale is spending a lot of money and then keeping all of this really close to themselves because, as of right now, it's really a competitive advantage to be able to handle extremely large data sets. If you were here yesterday when Wenmei and CJ were talking, one of the things they talked about, especially with getting GPU acceleration on vector databases is as we're able to accelerate these and manage larger databases, we can effectively increase the number of vectors that we're going to put into things. So, if we're using documents, we could chunk them up smaller so that an individual embedding vector is referring to a more granular piece of data. So, I think a lot of the A lot of us in the industry from the different sides of it see the trends in vector databases are bigger, bigger, bigger, bigger. With vector databases, so Alessandro gave a great talk on Monday. Where are you? I know you're in. Yep, back there.

He did a much better review. Of it. I'm going to hit this quickly. I'm good on time yet. So vector databases, just to sort of refresh everyone, is doing an approximate nearest neighbor search. So when you say, I want to get something like this document, give me something close. And then we can define a thread. Threshold for close enough. And it's usually like 99%, 95% accuracy. And what we're doing is we're trading off compute on the front end. So these indexes take a long time to build. So, for example, if we have a billion vectors, this can take 30 hours to build an index on a billion vectors. On a pretty beefy CPU system. But on the search side, we can search very efficiently across that billion vectors and get the hundred nearest neighbors approximately very, very fast with a lot of concurrency, with a lot of parallelism. One of the other problems I've comes in though is most of the indexes that are optimized to be able to do very fast and efficient search are indexes that you cannot update. So the way that this ends up looking is we will scale out indexes to shard across horizontally. Each individual Will shard then would need to be rebuilt as new data is added to it, depending on the frequency of new data coming in. That build process can be very, very long. A billion vectors, like I said, 30 hours, 100 million is pretty linear, is a three to four hour process to build.

And then these indexes are relatively large, depending on the The data types that we're actually using for this, because it can be FP8, FP16, FP32 if you're wild, which means a billion vectors is going to be on the order of 100 gigabytes to a terabyte of data on disk once we have that index. On the indexing side, we can use CPUs for that. One of the benefits is we can throw a bunch of memory at the problem. The reason it's a benefit is that shard size is effectively limited to the amount of memory in an individual node. So, by using CPUs, we can do larger shards, which can help on the sort of search efficiency. But ideally, we'd probably like to use GPUs for building these indexes because they are. Way faster. NVIDIA is shared numbers 30x faster when using Kegra versus other indexes to build on GPUs. So that 30-hour build process is now a one-hour build process. So something that is nowhere near real time can suddenly start to look real time. The disadvantage on GPUs, though, is we're going back to the amount of memory per node for the size of your shard. That shrinks us down quite a bit. CJ and Wenmay talking about SCADA, storage next, and trying to overcome those challenges. So, this is definitely an area that we want to be looking at. I don't think I call it out later, but that. So, this is one of the really specific difficulties with trying to do a benchmark for vector databases, though. We're right on the cusp of doing, I think, large transitions to GPU-accelerated vector databases as the libraries mature and we're able to. To overcome a lot of these challenges.

So, the benchmarks that we would implement over the next six months to have, let's say, for the next release, are likely to be really short-lived. Because following that, we really want to be able to look at what are the tough problems for people, and that's going to be GPU-accelerated. And if we're Looking at GPU acceleration offering a 30x increase in performance, realistically, for anything that's using storage, that's a 30x increase in the load to storage as well. And that's what we want to be benchmarking if we're trying to understand the effects of vector databases and how they depend on storage, right? So, this is a big hurdle. And part of it is, we just need to wait far enough in time so that we can start doing the cool GPU accelerated. But that goes back to the earlier issue of: do we now need to use GPUs just to test storage for this workload? Is there a way that we can represent this workload without needing GPUs since we don't have good access to the GPU accelerated system? Yet, we can't really figure out what that workload looks like to start developing what an emulated version of that would look like. So, this is also a really big opportunity if anyone's really interested in this and trying to figure out how we can represent a GPU-accelerated vector database from the search or the index build side on storage without needing the GPUs, feel free to come into MLC. Commons and ML Perfect storage. Like I said, there were two talks. Alessandro gave a great one. I think ACES is today. Yeah. So I'm plugging it, and I don't actually know what's going to be in it.

So I'm assuming that, like his past presentations, it'll be pretty useful. From a vector database benchmarking goals perspective, we want to measure performance, we want to scale data sets to representative sizes, we want to look at the use case of a throughput test or a latency test, we want to make sure that people don't need to do big downloads. One of the sort of unintended Side effects of using real data sets that I think a lot of us don't necessarily realize, and I didn't until I talked to someone who told me what their hosting bill was. Every time someone downloads one of these big data sets, there's a bill associated with moving that data. So the five terabyte data sets that are being used for Vector search, we should not be using those for testing our storage. Those are for testing algorithms and for testing the compute kernels and how you're actually going about solving the real problem. Not that storage isn't a real problem, but we don't need real data to be able to test the storage. So we don't want big downloads. And we want to not require GPUs. We want to be able to test scaling without that. And we want to make sure we're not doing high compute either. With vector databases today, one of the problems that we do see is that it is a compute-intensive workload even on CPUs. So if we're trying to test storage on CPUs, this ends up looking like, I mean, Normal database benchmarks, you just have more compute per individual query. Some specific challenges with trying to meet those goals. Like I said, data. So the inputs to a vector database are a vector, right?

They're an embedding vector that came from a model. If we start with real data, Then we need to do a bunch of compute operations to create the embedding vectors. If we start with existing data, we're locked into a dimensionality and data type. So, ideally, what we want to look at is how does storage respond if we have 128-dimension vectors, 256, 512, on up to Whatever we can imagine, right? But if we're using real data sets, we're locked into a size unless we want to have an algorithm that's going to change those. And a lot of times they're going to be a specific data type, but we want to test maybe int8 or FP32 or anything in between. The tools that exist, the primary One that's out there today is VectorDB Bench, and this is focused on measuring performance and accuracy of results. Almost the entire ecosystem around testing vector databases is really focused on measuring accuracy. I don't care about accuracy. Assuming that someone is going to be looking at a system, they're going to know that it's this database, it's this index, they've got this set of parameters, which is going to give them this recall rate on their data set. And now they want to know what storage looks like. So I want to be able to test that configuration, assuming they already know what they need to know about accuracy. But one of the places that this becomes difficult is if we're trying to. Do a benchmark definition so that people can test stuff and submit stuff when we're comparing against each other. We want to be able to show how people can test a different database index, one versus the other.

But that changes accuracy. And if we're not measuring accuracy, we need some other process to have verified that they've met the accuracy thresholds. So, how do we put that in the definition? How do we measure that? How do we ensure that the data sets we're generating match those requirements is a pretty big challenge with trying to define a vector database benchmark that is focused on storage and has scalability. And then just the databases and indexes and the matrix of these things that you can put together and the configurations that you have on these also affect. Performance and accuracy. And then, if we're looking at storage, most of us are just going to immediately look at, ah, disk ANN, this is a storage-based index. But you can also use HNSW, which is an in-memory index, but put it on storage and mmap it. That's reasonable. That's something that you can do. How do we compare these against each other? So we are making progress here. One of the things is we do have a new tool, VDBBench, not VDBench. That's old school storage testing. This lets us create synthetic data sets of random data. We can change the dimensions of X. We can change the data type, we can execute random queries, we can do it in batches, we can scale out the number of processes that we're using. A big haul out to Devicina and Alessandro, both members of the ML Perk Storage community, contributing to the development of this. I know it's under my personal GitHub handle. This is a community project. And it would not exist without the work of everyone involved.

There are some specific limitations of the tool. Like I said, we don't measure accuracy of results. So we would need to compare externally with something. We only support HNSW and Disk ANN and MILVIS today. And we need to verify that. The randomly generated data results in a workload that is representative of real data. This one's not hard. Like, okay, we can create 100 million vectors, we can download 100 million vectors. For the purpose of research, that's a reasonable use case for downloading real data. It's just a matter of time. So, if someone is looking at getting started with Benchmarking vector databases, and you think that that's an experiment you would like to run, let me know. Let's put something together and I can help you figure out what we need to do to run that experiment and get the data that we need to sort of make future decisions. I do have a little bit of sample data. I'm going to go through this relatively quick. I'm mostly testing. Single process, single batch, 64 processes, 64 batches. Call out to one of my teammates, Siley, in Austin. She was running these tests and doing a lot of this analysis. When we look at sort of intensity to disk and what does the transfer size look at with disk ANN, this is a 100% 8K transfers. One of the other really, really, really great things about testing disk ANN, if you run a query, it's going to do disk lookups at 8K for a given dimensionality. If you run the exact same query again, it does. The same disk accesses. It does not use the file system cache.

Everyone here who has ever done storage testing, when you find out that an application is not using your file system cache, it is one of the best pieces of news that you can get. File system cache, as useful as it is, just always gets in the way and messes stuff up, right? So this is great. The question is if it's using ODirect? Probably. I mean it's gotta be, or it's giving a hint that says don't cache this. Yeah. Alessandro. So when we do a first, we go to a compact compacted uh version of other models for you. all the uh neighborhood uh uh locations in the file. So it's a five file uh we have first, I know the locations and then I go to the same if if there is a closer note first, the neighborhood's gonna be very close in the L P A range. So I thought that uh It could be that I should say but the game come from the values values in that. I think my question is more I assume somebody's written code for testing and should actually identify the right flag in it because otherwise it's a level of detail. Qdup side for the two versions where we're doing latency focused and throughput focused. Latency focused, low queue dup, like we would expect. We're just doing one transaction one after the other. Qdup's on the order of 5 to 10. Really nice bell curve. These are good-looking plots, too. Not as interesting as the one from previously, though. The one on the right is showing the The throughput-oriented case, and this is also going to give us sort of that bell curve with a really long tail because we're able to queue up a lot of operations occasionally.

There needs to be more testing, but I strongly suspect that this is going to be a latency-sensitive workload and that it. If I give it a device that has lower latency, even though we don't have relatively high QDIP, that will translate into application performance. It's basically: does it need IOs to be able to make future decisions about what IOs to execute? Yes, we know that's how vector databases work. Those sorts of operations are going to be latency sensitive, so it would be interesting. To see if we have 20% better latency on storage, does that translate to 20% better application performance? All right, KB cache management. This one I think is one of the most interesting ones and one of the most absolutely mind-boggling for trying to figure out how do we make a benchmark for this. There were two extremely good presentations on Monday. Uru from Dell and Esher from PlyOps, both of whom are here today. Thank you for attending. Both of you, absolutely fantastic content. View the recordings if you did not view them. They're going to give you way more detail into KB caching and how it works and sort of the internals, which are going to lead into why it's difficult. I'm going to give A pretty hand-wavy view just to make sure that we're at least all on the same page with why are we talking about this. So, the main thing to keep in mind with KV caches is this is sort of like an LLM's understanding of words in context. KVCache also suffers from being. Being the most poorly named technologies in AI, I think at least for everyone in here, right? It is not a key-value database.

We are not taking a key and looking up a value somewhere on storage. It is not a caching system in the way that we're generally used to thinking about it. It is technically key and value, that is what the case is. NV stands for, and it is technically caching data, but it makes the conversation difficult. And what makes it particularly difficult is when we talk about caching these. So now we're talking about KVCache Cache, which is just annoying, right? So let's. Yeah. KV store. Is a better way of doing this? I will try to update mine in the future. KV stores, thank you. That is better. Okay, so I'm gonna walk through the sequence of processing a query. The first part is we take whatever we're putting in, and we need to generate the K and V vectors for each token. Okay? The first token, we do some compute, we get a KNV. The second token, we need to access the KNV from the first token, do some compute, get a KNV. Third token, we need to access the KNV from the first token and the second token to generate the KNV for that one. What this means is that when we're looking at the in-memory representation, we've got k and v vectors for each of these tokens. The cache aspect is that when we get to token 3, we are reading k and v of token 1 and 2. We're not calculating them again, even though we could. So those are cached so that we don't need to recompute just as we're walking through this. process and the amount of memory needed for KVs grows linearly with the size of our sequence. So if we have 1,000 tokens versus 100 tokens, that is a 10x increase in tokens.

It is a 10x increase in KV size. There's a little bit of hand wavy in here, but it's close enough. The other key piece is that those calculations become more computationally intensive for each token because we need to go through more data. So the amount of time it takes to calculate the KVs grows quadratically. So O to the N squared. Squared. Not squared squared, it's, I think, I estimate it's like one and a half for the actual power on that. But it's still a power relationship, right? So what we see is that the KV store is effectively using memory capacity to reduce the compute requirements. Token generation, so during the decode phase. So we're trading capacity to reduce compute. The problem is that as AI has progressed and we've gotten larger models and we've gotten longer context, that trade-off is becoming more and more difficult with the amount of HBM capacity that we actually have on GPUs. If we look at the KVs for a million tokens, and I've got a time and a size value here, so 8B200s for Lama4, Maverick, and FP8, 140 seconds to calculate those KVs. So, granted, this is a million tokens, this is a really long query, but it's two and a half. Minutes before you can even start generating anything. There's no way that you can do that real-time, right? That is not a real-time interface. The other problem is that that's 15 and a half gigs of KV if we're using FP8. And if you want to use FP32, that's worse, right? Individual queries, then, the KVs can just be clogging up your. Memory capacity.

That can actually prevent you from running other queries even if you have compute available because you don't have enough capacity to even instantiate the next query. So, what we want to be able to do is figure out how do we optimize this? Because any optimizations to not do KV calculations reduces GPU compute. And any way that we can figure out to put these KVs somewhere else frees up that capacity for doing real work right now in sort of the part that people are paying for. And I do want to clarify there's two specific versions of a technique with what we're doing. These are the words that I use. They're not industry standard. This is kind of another issue in the industry when we're talking about this. It's the difference between offload and reuse. So let's say we went through this process and our input was tokens one through six, and then we need to go and generate token seven and token eight. To generate tokens, 7, we need to read all of the KVs for tokens 1 through 6. Everything that we've been talking about has been assuming that that's been in HVM. Now, let's say we had calculated those previously and we're asking another question about a document that we've already talked about. We can pull those KVs from somewhere and reuse them. We pull them back into HPM and we start generating new tokens, token seven, token eight. Alternatively, we can keep those on that other media, which could be a memory technology somewhere else, it could be a storage technology if it's fast enough, and every time we have to generate a token, we can read them from that remote media.

Reading them during decode for every single token, I call offload. This is most commonly going to use CPU attached memory. So you have GPU. It has a high-speed bus to your CPU. Your CPU can have significantly more memory than you have HPM capacity. That gives you additional capacity to use for your KV tokens while you're doing decode. The reuse aspect is where this may be a minutes to days to weeks delay between accessing your KVs the last time to the next time. So that's going to be on persistent storage somewhere. It could be a tier of local NVMe, it could be remote storage, it could be in. CPU memory as well, is just probably a poor use of that CPU memory. Offload requires moderately high bandwidth before you start trashing your performance. Because every token needs to be reading all of this data for generation. When we're looking at that million. Token context and it's 15 gigabytes, and you need to generate a token. If you can read at 15 gigabytes a second, that means the absolute fastest token per second that you can do is one, right? Because it will take you one second at 15 gigabytes a second to read all of the KV to be able to generate a token. On the reuse side, a lot of times we're talking about. About, we need storage that is faster than the time to recompute those KVs, but really it just needs to be fast enough to meet the SLAs. So, one of the things that comes into play is when we're scheduling and trying to figure out do we want to reuse tokens, do we want to store it somewhere, do we want to just recompute them later?

Every time that we can pull from somewhere else is GPU compute that we don't need to use for something that's already been done. So, if we can save compute, that gives us the opportunity to use that compute for something that's going to be more profitable. From a workload perspective, generally large. So, like I said, KV is for a Million token that's in the 15 gigabyte range. That's actually on the small side. That was assuming a small KV size per token. There are other models with larger KVs per token. So small is probably like DeepSeek, 70 kilobytes per token. Large, I don't remember which specific models, but we can get up into the 500 kilobytes per token range. KB caches are going to be managed in blocks of tokens. 64 is kind of the smallest that I've ever seen referenced and used, but theoretically we can go smaller if we want more granular access. But that really gets into the domain of why are we trying to access fewer than 64 tokens at a time. We probably don't want to do that. If it's 28 tokens, just compute that. Be easier to compute that. On the large side, if we're looking at 16,000 tokens with a large KV per token, like, okay, that's 8 gigabytes of KV, and then we need to be able to dump that all at once, that's going to make sense to maybe use larger blocks of tokens if this is a primary use case, because you know you're going to be accessing those all at once. We're also going to have high generation rates.

So if we look at the throughput in terms of tokens per second of GPUs today, we see upwards of 2,000, 5,000, 20,000 tokens per second, depending on the model. Each token has an associated KV. We can do some math and turn that into a number of terabytes per day that we're actually writing. And generating in terms of KV. Now, there's going to be layers in this hierarchy. We'll send some of that to memory. Some of this we know we're not going to ever reuse. And then that's going to filter out and figure out how much do we need to keep to hit a specific cache hit rate. There's a bunch of stuff that can go into that. And then below this threshold, it turns into bandwidth sensitive. This threshold is compute sensitive. KB caches, another thing, they're getting bigger. There's a whole bunch of stuff saying that queries are getting longer. Agentic AI is putting more data through the system. AI gets smarter as we give it more data. So we're trying to find more and more ways to put more and more data into our AI systems. And reasoning is generating 10 times as many tokens for a given query, which means 10 times as many KV tokens also being generated. KVCache is read and written as an entire unit without partial accesses. It's kind of a big asterisk on that one. For now, kinda, mostly, right? In terms of the hierarchy, If we want to do KV cache reuse, we can put this pretty much anywhere. One of the other things that comes into play is: let's say we have KVs on local and VME, and we think about another query coming in and it needs to reuse those KVs. We have options.

Maybe we schedule it on that same GPU because that's where the KVs are near. We take that data and we RDMA it through this network that is directly attached to directly into a different GPU. So, this locality, in my view, is not a limiter. It's a strength in a certain way. And one of the other pieces is: okay, maybe we don't have data reliability and redundancy. We're storing KVs in local NVMe, that's fine. If we lose one of the local NVMe's that's maybe a couple hours worth of KV, we can generate that again. If we lose a host, there's bigger problems than just worrying about the data that was on the drives that were attached to that host. All right, this is basically my last slide. So, in terms of benchmarking and the specific challenges, I really, really want to get a good KVCache benchmark that lets us understand the impact of storage on KVCache reuse and offload if it makes sense. There are a bunch of challenges. The first one is the existing benchmarks are LLM information. Benchmarks where you're going to run this on a GPU system and then you can add KVCache and see how that affects things, but it's not benchmarking KVCache, it's benchmarking the AI server. So you need an AI server. This goes back to problem one: that's expensive. The rest of this is just sort of like a random order of thoughts of things that are just. Hard and how do we figure out how this applies? The order of queries is going to affect cache hit rate.

So, if we're trying to randomize things, the order of queries, the size of queries, we want things to be consistent so that run to run you're getting really similar results. That's hard. KB caches can be tiered or cached in memory, local NVMe, remote, object storage, or any sort of combination. There's a lot of software packages that are managing KV caches across these tiers and caches, and they're going to have different effects on what the workload looks like and what the performance effects are. There's tunables. So, when I went and talked about block size, if we do a smaller block size, that's going to affect storage access granularity. If we have one that's too large, then we end up having read amplification. If we change the performance of one of these layers in the tier, how does that actually affect the query workload? We want to be able to answer that question without needing to run the queries on an AI server. That mapping is difficult, and we don't have a view into that right now. How does the size of a layer affect things? So, if that NVMe layer is bigger, that's going to be a bigger. Affect the cache hit rate of what's coming after that, also depending on your workload, which is going to have a natural sort of cache hit rate that it can do based off of like coding. You have one file, and a whole bunch of people are asking that, or a bunch of people asking different chats with a lower cache hit rate. And then the number of GPUs, and this is one of my biggest opens that I would really like if someone would give me the answer to this one.

Data layout of KV caches on disk. So if we have a number of GPUs that we're expecting to use for inference and we have that token, the KV cache for that token gets distributed between those GPUs. So if we have Two GPUs, let's say, and two KV tokens, there's two ways that we could organize this data. One is by token. So all of the KV for an individual token is always together. The other way is to organize it by GPU, so that the part of KV1 and the part of KV2 that goes for GPU 0 is stored together, and then GPU1 is storing this together. Data layout is going to affect, I think, most of us. And if we can try to figure this out, and this is aside just from benchmarking, but we probably need to figure that out for real-life use cases as well and for developing our devices. I guess they have two other ones. Don't worry about it. There's a bunch of other sessions where people talked about really. Cool stuff, or are going to talk about cool stuff. The future looks really exciting. This is a really great time to be working on storage and working in AI. Yeah, thanks. That's it. What questions have you got? I'll ask the same question I asked yesterday. How do you know that? Things snapshots are atomic. We know that that thing is not at fun. So, how do we know that snapshots are atomic? So, this is on the checkpointing side, right? And that's that's time. We don't have an answer to that one. Well, at least I don't have an answer to that one. I'm gonna assume that the people that are actually developing the checkpointing processes are. The software level have answers to that?

We saw that was true 20 years ago, and we know it's not math. I'll respond to that. They are atomic, right? They are atomic. I work for a GPU company. We know when the math kernel stops. We know when the memory has been flushed so that coherent and visible in the address space. And then we do the DMA to NVMe, right? And so software is making sure that that either happens in its entirety or we say it doesn't happen. Okay, so you so we have in the system. Yep. And then in that you're supposed to be stable long enough to be able to use So we know it's the stateful photo off our new stores offline for the next one. Yeah, okay, yeah, okay, yeah. I worked yeah, it's very I worked really hard to try to find some cases that improved the uh what the quality of the case has. Uh with the former criminal. And I got a lot excited when I finally found something that, you know, a little bouncing, and then I looked into how the data is actually reloaded. And uh the current best practice is actually to reload into your displacing Uh prefo. So you can reload it into the set of resources that you use. The problem is that that's a function you have. It means that that has a function in it. And even if they're slow ignore thousands and not fast requests, um the amount of available When you divide it into the size of the cache, the context that you're you're bringing in, ends up being a small process. You line that up and the time to go refill the top of the new portion. Yeah, so I think there's two things.

So the comment is around is it actually performance critical to be able to load KV caches into systems? And today, when we're looking at it and the amount of network bandwidth that we have and the processes for how things are going in, it doesn't seem performance critical. Two specific things that lead me to think it's really important that we try to solve these problems now instead of when it becomes a problem. The first is if you look at your roadmap and the sort of historical improvement. Improvements in algorithms and frameworks that we've had. Over the next three to four years, we're looking at a 30x increase in tokens per second generation. That moves things really quickly in an entirely different direction. The rest of the system's not getting 30 times faster, right? And this part's hard because this starts looking at: hey, we had exponential for a while, it's going to be exponential again, right? Like, nothing can stay exponential forever, but trying to figure out when that forever stops is hard. And it doesn't look like it's in the next one to two years, probably not three years. So, looking out. That far, things really become bigger. The other thing that I see is the mismatch between input sequence length and output sequence length. So we look at like average query sizes and all this other stuff that's happening. The big thing that's happening is we're trying to figure out how to put more and more data into these systems.

And if we get significantly faster query processing rates, And token generation rates, that means we can better handle way more input sequence length. And as soon as we start trying to increase our input sequence length faster than our output sequence length, I think that's one of the other things that's really going to cause performance criticality. So if we're looking at input sequence lengths today, okay, we've got a thousand. 4,000, maybe up to 16,000 for long ones. But what if our average starts becoming 250K to a million on our input sequence lengths because we realize that we are actually benefiting from doing so? Does that start to become more performance critical then? And as we've scaled out to a large number of our queries doing that type of thing? Of access? It seems like it could be. Now, I'm not saying it will, which is one of the reasons why benchmarks are useful and we want benchmarks and we want to develop this so that we can try to understand where does this come into play? Where does having faster storage actually affect query processing rates? And it goes back to one of my points that what we need is for the system to let us benchmark KV management and how storage affects the performance of a KV management system and then have a mapping of how that actually turns into application performance. And it's this piece where right now we have no idea, right? And I agree. If we're doing megabytes per latest implementation To be able to really evaluate what happens with licenses? Yeah, that's what you like to do. Yeah.

All right, we need to move on to the next week. Thank you.
