SNIA SDC 2025 - Disaggregated KV Storage: A New Tier for Efficient Scalable LLM Inference

So, hi everyone, I'm Ishkar from FlyOps and today I will explain how adding a new tier to the AI stack Disaggregated, shared, key-value storage can help make LLM inference more scalable and more cost-effective. Our work is inspired by work that was done both in academia and in industry in other companies, but it builds mainly on. The key value store that was developed in our company, and I hope to explain and to convince you that indeed this is the best fit for LLM inference today in the talk. So, earlier this year, Eric Schmidt, former CEO of Google, said that. Not only AI revolution is not overhyped, it is rather underhyped, both in terms of the opportunities that it brings to us and also in terms of the challenges, mainly infrastructure challenges, major challenges that we need to overcome. Come. Now, we are in the last few years, obviously, as persons, as citizens of the world, have looked how LLM can help us in our personal day-to-day lives. But I think that we are as storage and network companies, as as as part of the the the tech community. We also must think of how we can contribute to this uh to this um revolution. And I think that actually we are very fortunate to be working in this uh in this era. Uh it's it's amazing. I've been uh exploring this uh This field for the last two years, and it's really the pace in which innovation comes in is really overwhelming. And we shouldn't miss the opportunity to become very essential in the AI stack in this way. So, and I'm not just Talking about feeding the beast or not being the weakest link in the chain.

I'm talking about becoming really an essential component to the pipeline. Imagine an SSD walking in. To a GPU bar and saying, Hey, Fox, can I help you with latency? So it might be funny, but I think this is the reality, and I hope we can see it today. So, as we all know, LLM applications are really growing rapidly. and they leading to like immense deployment of expensive and power hungry GPUs. Eric Schmitz in his talk mentioned that there are countries that are now deploying five to ten gigawatts data centers for serving uh LMM inference. That mean each one is five to ten is equal to five to ten uh nuclear nuclear nuclear power plants. So that's that's really big. So obviously the main problem number one problem is electricity and uh resources. And GPUs and the power that they con that they consume is is limited. And the compute power that uh is needed uh to serve uh LLM inference uh often exceed the supplies, leading to uh the fact that in many cases um User requests are denied or served without meeting the SLAs, violation of SLAs. For example, the time-to-force token or the time per output token, which captures the interactivity of the system. So, our goal is to. to uh build solution that increase the efficiency of existing infrastructure. And that should be uh both or either in a higher uh performance per per watt and better user experience uh uh per dollar. And the question is Can we achieve both? It's challenging. Or, put in other words, our goal is to serve more queries with larger models, faster, all under the same power budget.

Okay, so let's take this goal and keep it in mind throughout. The presentation. Now, in this room, most of us are engineers and scientists, so we don't like words like higher better. We want it to be more concrete and formal. So, for this, we have this diagram, this plot. The y-axis are the Throughput represented as the RPS normalized per GPU. And the x-axis are the latency of the system captured as TPS normalized per user. So what this plot captures is the tension between the system efficiency. Versus user experience. So you can see, and this is the result of actual experiment that we ran. So you can see that when the throughput increases, then the latency in terms both in terms of user interactivity and the time per output token is getting lower. While if we want to improve the user experience, there is a limit on the traffic, the amount of traffic that the system can serve. And Throughput becomes lower. So we are always in this tension between satisfying these two requirements. And the best that we can do is actually to push this curve outward. Right? So we want to have consider a special. Specific SLA that you define for the system, let's say 25 tokens per second, we want to get higher efficiency per that specific SLA. And this is exactly what our solution provides. So, okay, so far we've explained. Order define the challenges that we have in LLM inference. And the agenda for the rest of the talk is first to explain why pre-fill and KVCache are so dominant in gaining end-to-end performance.

Then I will describe the uh shared KV cache uh uh approach for offloading uh the KV cache into uh uh disaggregated storage. And uh in between I will uh have some uh theoretical analysis and results uh showing uh uh analyzing the model that uh We present and the implications on system design. So let's dive in. First, let's try to understand why at all LLM applications are so costly or so heavy. So you know many popular LLM applications. Actually, have repetitive context. The first example would be chatbots that, as you know, they reuse your earlier history, your earlier conversation history whenever answering your next, your following answer. So this way, the context. Context, the prompt is growing each turn. Likewise, bug fixing systems are analyzing entire repositories, code repositories, over and over again. And personal assistant bots are continuously querying and analyzing and reading a big uh set of documents in a data set that can be either proprietary or like uh the personal history of a person. So this repetitive uh computation is uh obviously highly inefficient, right? We have Some researchers say that up to ninety-nine percent of the prefill are costs are done by repeated computation that already been done in the past, and this obviously a huge waste of the GPU resources. But worse, the fact that we have to meet the SLA, having this larger, longer periods of time to run the pre-fill, limit the HPM utilization and the end-to-end gain by limiting the batch size that we can Serve, and this is even crucial, more crucial than the pre-fill time that it takes.

So, let's zoom in to understand how exactly LLM inference is working. So, it basically can be separated into two main phases. The first phase is a pre-fill phase, where we process the entire prompt that was given by the user. And the main responsibility of the pre-fill phase is actually to build the KVCche tensors for the second phase. Okay, so it also generates the first output token. So it is measured by the time to first token. This is TTFT is the metric by which we measure the pre-fill. And it is usually between 400. Hundred milliseconds to one second. And this phase is compute bound. So as we have longer prompts, longer context, it takes more time. The second phase is the decode phase, where you sequentially generate tokens one by one. It's memory bandwidth bound because it spends most of the time loading both the model memory and the KVC tensor into the GPU SRAM. And it's the the metric that we use to measure it is the time per output token, tipot, and it is usually between forty millisecond to one hundred millisecond. Just to to make sure that we that we understand and uh we're on the same page. Uh When I say that decode takes most of the time is unloading the memory into the SRAM GPU, that means that it happens on each decode step. So for every time that you generate the token, you need to really load the entire uh memory of the uh model into the SRAM. There is simply not enough space to hold the entire memory, so you hold it and uh evict it and uh load it again, and uh and that's uh but but but that's not a thing that currently we see how we can uh optimize.

So uh now that we've focused on uh a single turn, how we how we run the prefill and the decode uh in NLM inference, now uh I want to uh zoom out and discuss the multi-turn uh uh sessions. Use cases that I've described earlier. So, what we can see is that between each turn, the prompt is getting longer, and so the KV cache is also getting bigger and more time to compute. So, between turns, so we have the first question. And the first uh answer. But until the second question arrives, usually the K V cache is being evicted. Simply, there is not enough room in the HBM to serve all the active and pending uh requirements, so some of the KV cache needs to be evicted from it. And then on the second turn, You need to recompute the pre-fill, although it was already computed in the first turn. So in our example, Q1 and A1 are recomputed overall three times in three turns. And this is a huge waste of the GPU. Compute cycles. And this is really the aha moment for storage people, right? Because KV cache offloading just has just a very simple idea. Instead of discarding the KV cache tensor, From HBM, we can reduce the time to first token simply by moving them, writing the KVCache tensor, into some KVCache store. Okay, so there can be several types of KVCache stores, and I will elaborate about this later on in a later slide. But in our case, we are offloading uh the KV cache tensor into our KV KV store, uh our Lightning AI box. And uh what's what what we can also see here in this picture is that the KV cache tensors are created Are generated in very small chunks during the decode phase.

And in order not to become the bottleneck of the system, they need to continuously be streamed into the KVCche storage. Okay? And they are very small as it is, and there are Several optimization techniques for those who are familiar with it, like GQA, quantization, that make them even smaller. So it's very important that the KV star is able to handle a large amount of IOPS, of small random IOPS. Okay? This is a an important uh characteristic of of the K V store. So what what makes our our solution uh unique? So uh first it supports uh a GPU initiated IO into a disaggregated K V store. So, GPU Initiative O was just described in the earlier talk, happily for me. And what I can say is all the intelligence that was described in the previous talk is already inside in our solution. And actually, As CJ also mentioned in the previous talk, GPU-initiated IO is actually incepted and implemented by NVIDIA. And what we did is actually to extend it to support KV API. And so if you're here to Tomorrow CJ and Wen May have a session in which they will, I'm sure, will tell about their vision for GPU initiatives. I'm proud to say that we are also proud of it. We are also part of it as we've extended it to support A key value API, and you need to understand that this is very important because key value API gives you is very flexible and makes it a very strong building block for this, for this specific uh uh stack that I'm presenting here, but also for other use cases and and AI use cases that are not presented here.

So, our solution supports variable size, seamlessly supports compression, and is able to saturate the fabric with small random I.O. and without. The intervention of the CPU in the critical path. What was presented implicitly in the previous slide is that we actually need to do three things while we're doing the prefix. Right? We need to retrieve the past token that was already computed, to compute the new interaction for which we still don't have the KV cache, and to store the new KV cache. So, what was presented in previous slides, and now I'll say it explicitly, is that the KV cache is Tensors are managed at the layer, at each Perl layer has manages its own KV cache tensor. So this allows us a perfect overlap between I/O and compute. So, and this is what this slide demonstrates. So, for example, when computing the KVCATECHECHEC The new KV cache of layer 4. And the same time we are doing, we are prefetching the KV cache for layer 5 and writing the KV cache that was generated in layer 3. And this is all possible with our ASIN. Uh GPU-initiated KV uh KVIO. We have two uh GPU driven uh uh architecture. Uh the first is is a clear clean uh GPU initiated AIO architecture that is that uses uh A DPU, smart NIC like the NVIDIA Bluefield, in order to pass the I.O. from the GPU in the initiator node into the storage in the target node.

So the DPU here serves as just emulate and N VME device and uh therefore allows us to move the uh the GPU itself to initiate the IOs and to use uh uh the R D M A to bring the data directly from the HBM of the GPU to the uh target to the Through the NIC through to the target uh nodes and also uh backwards directly to the HBM. A second uh architecture that we implemented in case our customers don't have uh a DPU in their environment uh uh requires us to have the CP to be part of the pipeline because now we lost uh our uh ability to uh to have the uh NVMe device simulation. So we have a KV gateway uh component that uh does all the um network stack Software that was previously done by the DPU. And we have the CPU here preparing the metadata, I don't know, allocating buffers and doing some stuff. But still, the GPU is the one. one that triggers and and and defines the timing in which uh the IO is uh is triggered and also uh does the synchronization and we need very light synchronization because we control the the solution uh to know when exactly to wait or not wait for a specific uh IO. So we've described the uh our solution, the the the in general, the approach and our solution and uh architecture. But now the question is uh when exactly does this approach uh pays off? What are the conditions, the system conditions, or the workload conditions in which IO outweigh GPU recomputation? Right? So for this, we've have a theory model. And that and we start just simply by modeling the pre-processing.

acceleration, just just understanding uh how we can measure uh the pre-fill acceleration. So this slide uh uh defines like basic terms that we need to to have the analysis. We have R the time the to retrieve the token from storage, T the time to compute a single token in the K V cache. The effective token acceleration we mark it as E, which is, of course, the ratio between these times. And alpha is the hit rate, the K V cache, that fraction that is cached in storage. And as you can see, R depends. depends mainly on the bandwidth of the IO, while T depends also uh or mainly on the model size, the uh KV cache size, the length of the K V cache, the length of the input, and also the compute uh compute power of the GPU. So obviously, if we want to compute how much time time to first token of a simple of of the vanilla solution would take, it would be T times the length of the input. But when we consider uh the KV cache of loading, there are two uh parts that we Need to consider. We have the time to retrieve the old KV cache, which is alpha, its portion is alpha. We have the time to compute the new KV cache, and also the time to write the new KV cache. Okay, so luckily. For us, when we are able to overlap the IO and compute, we can just take the maximum from all these terms, right? And not to add them all up. So, and when we are, the first insight is actually. That we see that the write and the compute have the same structure.

And if we know that write matches the compute time, which it usually does, then we can just eliminate this term from the equation and we are left with two elements: one describing the The time to retrieve the data, and one that describes the time to compute the data. And now, when we compare or divide these two terms, we see the speed up that we can get. have two regimes. One is compute bound and one is IO bound. Obviously when compute takes more time, then we're compute bound and this is the ratio in which we can speed up the uh computation. And when we are IO bound uh this is this is the the uh the ratio by which we uh speed up uh the emulation. Uh now uh let's see these two formulas just visually. It would be easier to understand. So what I have here is on the x-axis we have the the ratio, the uh the the the heat rate, alpha, that goes from zero to one. And we have the two two graphs that are representing the speed up both in case of IO bound and compute bound. And obviously, the real speed up is the minimum between the two. So and we mark here by alpha star the point in which we turn from compute bound to IO bound. Okay, it's an important point. And also I want to mention that this specific graph was created for E equals nine, meaning it's it's retrieving data from storage is nine times faster than computing uh the token. Okay, But obviously, it can change if E is different. So, two insights that we get from this plot. So, first, once we are in the compute-bound regime, I mean, that is defined by the heat ratio and the factor E, the time, the factor.

Factor by which we can speed up the computation. There is no need for faster I.O. Because we are already bounded by the compute. So replacing the SSD, the SSD storage with HBM and DRAN won't help us. Okay, so this is First, interesting insight. And the second insight is regarding the IO bound. Now, note that maybe it's hard to see here, but you can see the overall trend that it's getting lower as the heat rate increases. So, our way actually to maximize the speed of Is not to use all the KV cache that we have in the storage. We just need to stop at alpha star. That can be is obviously just can be computed during during inference time. So let's give a concrete example. Say that you have that your E is 9, so a retrieval is 9 times faster than compute, and you have 95 tokens out of 100 tokens in your KVCash store. It wouldn't be wise to bring all 95 tokens. Just bring 90 tokens. And let the compute, the GPU, compute the other 10 tokens. This way, you are compute I/O balanced and you are optimizing the utilization of both resources. Okay, so here is the result of. some tests that we ran. We compared our solution versus VLLM, which is de facto state of the art the best LLM inference that is currently out there. And what we did, we have we tested some model, I think Lama Lama 70B on H100, and we increase the we have different prompt sizes, and we set some SLA for teapot and for time to first token, and we simply increase the batch size until we meet the SLA.

So what What this gives us is 7x pre-fill acceleration, obviously, because we bring the so I forgot to mention we have 90% heat ratio here. So we are 7x pre-fill acceleration, and this allows us to have. Higher batch sizes and still meet the SLA, which brings us to 8x higher end-to-end throughput gain. Another thing that we can see here is that SplyOps is an enabler for being SLA component. Compliant in long prompt. So vanilla simply couldn't run, meet the SLA in the long prompt here, even with a single batch, a batch that consumes just a single request. So we're not just shrinking the time, but also. Enabling to run some of the workloads that are simply impossible with VLM. So, as I promised you, there are several ways to implement this KV cache of loading approach, and we are classified. them into stratas, into strata. So the first uh strata is uh S zero. It's simply storing the K V cache in HBM, which is simple and very fast, but obviously you have just a tiny capacity and most likely uh K V cache tensors are evicted from there. S1 extends the capacity by leveraging both either DRAM or SSD, but it remains non-shareable between different GPUs and incurs higher costs when, obviously, when you use DRAM. now uses a shared namespace and it's deep because it uses a disaggregated solution. But this is on the expense of either performance when you're using distributed file system or cost when you're using in-memory key value store. S3 has all the benefits. It has a shareable namespace, it's deep, and it improves performance. And obviously, a plyup solution is positioned here.

Okay, so up to f up to this point we've uh discussed uh uh just uh uh a single uh instance of uh VLLM. And obviously there are solution there are already solution of uh data center scale LLM uh inference, uh for example uh Dynamo by NVIDIA, LLMD by IBM, Google, etc. And this is a schematic view representing most of this solution. So it has a single centralized router that uses some mapping of the KV cache. It combines KV cache-aware routing with some load balancing strategies. And of course, since it ties the storage where it keeps the KV cache with the compute, it's not scalable. and uh obviously you have uh the the memory footprint for managing uh uh the the KV cache mapping and combining two different uh often uh uh um different uh strategies for routing uh would result in non-optimal uh routing. What disaggregated uh uh K V cache offloading does is simply decouple decouples obviously the storage from the compute. It allows um to be uh to improve the scalability, elasticity, uh cache uh uh to be uh recoverable. Supports PD reconfiguration and has all the benefits. So it's very simple when you think about it. We just and obviously it simplifies the routing because you just need to route by load balancing and you know that the KV storage would bring you the KVK. Wherever you need it. So you're delegating the I.O. to the technology that is an expertise in managing the I.O., and you just leave the GPU to do what it's best at, which is the compute.

So in multi-GPU, Systems, the prefill and a decode of different turns are often computed on different GPUs, as we see in this example. And this means that even if we have the KV cache for Q1 in this GPU, here we have two. Recompute it when we are in a compute-only system. When we have a disaggregated shared key-value store, we can just bring the KVK that was computed in any other node, and this makes cross-node operations. Very smooth and efficient. I mentioned briefly a case where pre-fill and decode are computed in separated pools. But there and this comes to solve some of the performance. Issue that we have in LLM inference. But it has its own disadvantages. So let's consider the case where we are co-locating pre-fill and decode on the same node. So obviously, now when we have continuous batching, we have some interference between different Requests. So if we have two decode steps that are batched, then that's okay. Decode steps love to be batched because anyway they are memory bandwidth bound. But if we're batching prefill or pre-fill decode, then we have interference. That creates this bubble that delays our execution. And actually, KVCHOF loading also helps us solve this bubble issues. So let's see if we can analyze this and model this and see exactly how much gain we. Can get from KVCache offloading for continuous batching. So obviously, B is the number of concurrent requests. This is the batch size, but obviously the number of pre-fill that are now batched is much smaller than B. Right? So consider these are the execution of, let's say, B.

Equals five, so and this is different requests that are running concurrently. So in some of the slots, we won't have prefill step at all. Some of the slots would have one prefill, maybe seldom will have two prefills, but almost never three or more prefill in a single slot. And actually, the Number of concurrent slots is distributed, follows a binomial distribution that depends both on the batch size and the size of the output, the average output size. So we still want to be able to analyze and capture what is the potential. Acceleration for pre-fill and end-to-end gain. So I'm not going to go into all the mathematical details. This can be done offline. But what we can see is that first, the time-to-first token is not simply B times time to first. Token of a single request, but it's more involved. But we also see that the time-to-first token also cascades into the computation of the teapot. And we see here exactly how it affects it. So we have, we are affected by the number of time-to-first tokens. Tokens by the time of pre-fill that are executed concurrently with the decode phase. And also the fact that we add we increase the batch size also contributes to our uh the time that we load the KV cache into the memory. So let's again see it visually. We have here in purple the time that is measured for what we call a basic teapot, when we average over all the teapot steps that are doesn't don't have any concurrent uh time uh prefill with them. And the light blue is the time that it takes for a teapot, the average teapot.

And you can see here the gap is exactly due to the effect of time-to-first token on TPOT. And this is the gap that we would want or be able to close if we reduce time to first token. So, going very briefly on the analysis. Analysis. As I mentioned, we have here when we compute tpot as a function of b, we have here the element, the incremental element, that depends on the number of prefills that we have in concurrent, and also the incremental portion, the incremental part that depends on uh the time that we load uh the additional KV caches into a memory. And uh if we want again to meet the SLA and have the maximal batch size, we can see that the gain is actually depends on delta P over delta H. Now plugging in the numbers We show that the gain actually depends on three major elements or components. First, the model parameters that are captured here, the GPU parameters that are captured here, and of course the application parameter. The size of the input and the size of the output. So, for example, what we see here, and this is, and okay, so, and we are separated into a short prompt and long prompt regime. This is due to the effect that the time to store the data into the model, to the SRAM of the GPU needs to consider both the model size and the KV cache size, which is affected by the prompt size. Okay, so at some point the KV cache size is the major part of the parameters that we are loading to the SRAM. And with a shorter prompt, the major most of the time spent in loading the model.

So, what we see here is that the ratio between the bandwidth of the memory bandwidth of the GPU to the compute power of the GPU affects the gain that we can get with KVCache. Loading. And for this reason, for example, we can bring much more gain for uh models that run on H twenty versus models that run on uh H two hundred. Okay, and there are more interesting things here, but I don't have much time. So just want to wrap up with uh A visual view of the improvement in continuous batching. We compared here a Dynamo, which is NVIDIA's data center solution for LLM inference, running pre-fill and decode co-located on a single node or disclosure. Aggregated on different nodes, and obviously we took the best performance for Dynamo versus our solution, Dynamo, that uses our solution with KVCAS offloading. And we can see that no matter The gain varies when we consider different points, but no matter where, we see a major improvement in the trade-off between system efficiency and user experience when using KVCache offloading. And this is exactly what we wanted. To happen, right? Pushing the trade-off curve upwards. That's it. This is all I had to say. I'll just recap some of the major insights that we saw in the presentation. So, first, KVKO. Uploading increases efficiency and reduces cost while maintaining user experience constraint. Throughput gains depend on the model, the GPU, and the workload, and we actually have a well-defined formula to estimate what would be the gain.

Compute-bound cases, which is actually really the majority of the cases, there is no benefit for faster-than-SSD memory solution for KV cache offloading. Speed up depends mainly on read performance and GPU-initiated I/O overlapping. compute and IO asynchronous, IO zero, CPU overhead, key value API are all crucial for getting higher performance and better efficiency. That's it. If you have any question, I think we have time. Assume in your case you had all the optimizations, overlapping compute, storage, uh X amount of hit rate and not really reading part of the data but computing it to optimize an all effect. And I assume you also had GPUs and new traffic using R D M A for accessibility. from your students. What was the equivalent with you here that was with a local SSP? Uh uh no VLLM d doesn't support uh yeah. So the question was about uh our micro our comparison for our solution versus uh uh VLLM. And uh VLLM have Has a feature that's called APC where it can store, it doesn't evict the KV cache from HBM if it doesn't have to. But it doesn't have like natively any support for KV cache offloading. So obviously the comparison is exactly what. But we wanted to compare what happens when you recompute the KB cache versus what happens when you bring it from storage. One more thing. So the last slide you had comparing dynamo, right? Which I assume brings in some of these verbial alarms. Is that a Dynamo runs over VLLM and you're right, I forgot to mention it. Obviously, all the storage, all the data centers.

solutions can run over they they use as a as a as a core element the some inference engine. So it can be VLM, SGLANG, TRTLLM. And in our experiment it was a VLM, Dynamo with VLLM. Thanks for the talk. Um do you have any data on the size of these pre-filled blobs, for want of a better word? Like in terms of like how big are they, distribution? Just trying to get a sense of how how how big they are. Uh let me see if I have uh Yeah. Okay, so the question if we have uh like an estimate of the uh size of the of the entire uh KV cache? Of the pre-fill that you're filling in. So when you do a storage IO, you know, typically what size like what's the distribution on size? So the VLLM and also other inference engine manage the key value tokens in blocks. So it can be 32 tokens, 64 tokens. In some cases, it's just a single token. And we write to the storage exactly these blocks. Aggregate more than a single block, but it's roughly a block. So the I/O that we generate depends only on the size of the block, and so we control it. But if you're asking about the entire size of the KV cache, obviously this depends on the workload. And you have 10 prompts of 32K or of 500K, and we have requests from customers for all sorts of sizes. And it's just a matter of math, you can just compute it. But what this table shows is is the size of the IO that uh we are doing and and what what are the performance requirements that uh that are needed in order to support uh uh this is if I this is uh uh running I think deep seek on uh uh uh Uh H two hundred or uh uh or something like that. Yeah.

Uh you mentioned earlier that when writing those blocks or creating new tokens that those would be random writes. Why would those be random in the middle of the instead of sequential appends. Okay, so you uh okay, so the question was uh why do I consider uh uh why we consider uh the rights from the KV cache of loading to be random rights and not uh sequential appends, like assuming you or assuming that you are writing to a file. And even then, it's not really you create sequential writes only if you're writing very big segments of data. If you are writing them here and there, they won't be sequential, right? So you're generating like this batch. Of 32 tokens, and then you're writing them. And the rate in which you generate them and write them makes them small, and hence they are random. Even if you're appending them, where would you append them? So either you batch all of them and write them. As a single segment, and then they would be sequential. But even then, you need to still understand where exactly they are located and map to them. From the application perspective, though, when we generate a block that's associated with the query, and then we have the next block that's also associated with that query. Those are considered sequential because they would likely be used together, right? So the difference between whether or not it today ends up random right versus is that an opportunity for optimization, it sounds like it is an opportunity. for optimization because there is knowledge in the application of these code together.

Maybe retrieved all as a single block, and then there is optimization for writing them also sequentially. Well, I didn't mention it because it's not in the scope of this talk, but when you think of future and really now existing, already existing. Use cases, it's going beyond prefix. You can't always assume that you are going to retrieve the entire prefix of the query. There are several applications that you would actually need small. Pieces of your history to retrieve them and use them and not you can maybe even change the order of the chunks that you need to retrieve. And they are now becoming even more and more common and would probably be even higher than the prefix portion. of the LLM application. So long answer uh for saying that you can't assume that the way that you would retrieve the KV cache from the uh storage would be sequential as you produced it. So, um third question, um by the way, I also wanted to bring the future uh for the last question if the future has not large enough. So you're writing out um fifty megabytes delinquently file. Is this equation over? Right now. Uh but my question is the performance of the storage system doesn't really depend on the load of it. So the load of it. And so um the benefit of getting the kb cache values from the storage for recapitulating it depends on whether the storage is loaded or not. It's very high. I wonder if But then if there are a lot of other tenants there, you know, you might be getting something. But without all of these models, it'll be without rubber, massive structure, just all the total.

Um uh first of all, you usually so the question is, is there uh uh Um if the storage uh time uh can can vary and uh to the point that it's actually uh more efficient to uh to recompute. So uh uh first of all, we when you consider uh storage uh time retrieval, you usually uh consider like the worst time. The the the what it would take when the system is saturated. Right? And obviously you don't want if if you're you're bringing your system into a saturation point, then you probably need uh more storage or more X D P in order not to not to degrade the performance uh of the storage. But um and I've heard that Dynamo and you'd have speaking about providing special APIs for storage on their provide information along with that data from uh that source that was questioned. And the second question to so it looks like in the use cases that you described people inside chat or partner won't serve great. Certain data, you know, specific evaluators can have some points loaded on your data. It's kind of not a key to uh not hack just because the channel is over files of that document. All the questions about that document will be asked by that user. Should you guys support something like eviction, complete eviction of files because you go in terms of uh, uh And about different use cases where the data essentially becomes cold and should be evicted. So, yes, obviously, we have smart eviction policies. But since we are an SSD company accelerating the SSD, the assumption is that you can.

have much uh such a huge uh volume of uh of storage compared to DRAM or anything that could be that you can save much more uh history. But obviously you need to be very smart on which uh key value exactly uh you are uh you are evicting for example if you consider it like like a chain like a sequence you would want to evict like the last blocks and not the first block that would eliminate the way the the the way to to serve it as a as a prefix and uh yes obviously we support it. I think we have time. I think we need to model it actually. Ah, we need. Okay, so thank you. We can talk offline.
