SNIA SDC 2025 - Choosing Your AI Storage Protocol: A Deep Dive into SMB and NFS Performance, Tuning, and Overhead

Hello, everyone. Thanks for attending today's session. My name is Sergei. I'm from Zinur, and also I have with me Ned from Tuxera. Ned is SMB expert here. So, and my goal for today's is to provide you with uh performance comparing result of NFS and SMB protocols under ML workloads. So let's start from our motivation. We are developing high performance block devices which which often use under parallel file systems like Laster, IBM Storage, Scale and BGFS. But some of our partners debug for high-performance storage for small to mid-sized clusters, and there are three possible use cases. First one is small installation of several dozens of GPU adapters, the second one is large installations where our solution can act as a component. PNFS flex file system and the first one is a nice on demand demand installation for GPU cloud providers. So I believe you have heard this. Many times we need high performance storage to keep GPU busy because for now the most expensive part of modern data center is GPU time. So let's start from NFS. Why NFS? So uh a lot of AI infrastructure engineers don't want to deal with uh Rail file system complexity and they want to have some uh stable and simple solutions and NFS fits good, so it supports uh it's great for some of AI uh I.O. patterns, it supports processing semantics. NFS has great performance features like NFS RDMA, TCP multi-streaming, NFS local I.O. And uh NFS also has some Some great features to for security and to operational efficiency. But uh we should always h have some choice.

And when we are talking about NS solution, the main competitor for S uh NFS is SMBA. For a long time SMB was not uh uh have not been uh considered as a solution for Linux only environment, uh especially for HPC based environment, but uh SMB has very good performance features like SMB multi-channel and SMB direct. Uh uh and And now when CFS client natively supports both, it's time to measure SMB in and compare it head to head to NFS in pure Linux environment. So uh let's talk how to measure and compare three years ago ML Commons introduced ML perf storage benchmark which allows us to simulate end-to-end training workflow and with different types of simulated NVIDIA accelerators with different types of workloads and models with Different types of frameworks, uh not spending a lot of uh time and not spending a lot of money for infrastructure. So ML perf storage supports different types of uh models like image segmentation, in image classification, uh and Cosmo flow, and now ML perf storage. 2.0 has added support for checkpoint workload. And and near future we are expecting for vector database I/O patch workload. A couple of thought words of about my test stand. So I had very simple test stand consisting of two nodes. First one Operated storage server running uh over ROIT engine uh file system and NFS or SMB server above and a single client uh having the same number of CPU cores. Uh I I've got 48 AMD CPU cores and the same amount of system memory and server and client was connected with dual ported 200 gig interface.

So of course I've got not the fastest uh nor the most modern uh hardware uh but for majority of the market 200 gig net Is reality, 400 gig is too expensive. And so my main goal was to utilize the capabilities of 200 gig interfaces. So my evaluation was restricted to two workloads. First one is checkpointing, and the second one One is uh um the uh un unit 3D training is uh only road supporting all generated semantics and the most storage intensive uh among ML perf storage pathloads. Last year at FMS, uh Micron provided information about uh Uh ML Perf stor d uh ML Perf storage workload. So here you can see that MLPerf storage three the three D unit uh workload uh du does only uh one hundred twenty K block reads. And on the right side Uh s right part of the slide you can see the query depth distribution. We speak of fifty about forty five. So the typical mm ml pair of ben storage benchmark portfolio looks like that. So first of all we need to calculate minimum data set size, uh having in the mind the amount of memory on the host, having in the mind expected number of GPUs, then we need to generate data set, then we can run benchmark with different parameters and uh after succ success we can uh generate report. Uh and What is success mean what does succ success mean? So in terms of ML perf storage benchmark success means that we can provide um s simula simulated GPU with storage throughput measured in samples per second while keeping average GPU utilization. at more than uh ninety percent. So here you can see my command to run the benchmark.

So uh as I said I used NFS uh I used uh MLPer training for f 3DUNet and checkpoint and for 3D UNET I enabled ODirect and for checkpointing I'm enabled f F sync operations. So uh NFS is a very simple protocol but it's very easy to do badly. So I run my NFS server with default parameters and mount Client with default parameters, simulated uh eight GPUs, and you can see that I was stacked at five percent of uh average utilization, GPU utilization, but which is quite far away from expected ninety percent. Then I enabled RDMA, uh uh very Simple wh one um parameter was changed, the performance increased ten uh almost ten times, but I still uncentified these results. That means I need to do some tuning. So t the typical tuning workflow looks like that. First of all, we need to tune back-end storage. Uh uh Especially we just need to uh tune it f for worst case scenario, then we need to set file system correctly. Uh uh uh after that we can uh tune our NFS OSMB server options and enable some capabilities. After that we can run first benchmark from client side to tune network, to tune NFS client options at times we need to change NFS uh provide us with broad and um very good uh set of tools to observe what is going on, uh uh to understand bottlenecks, to be sure that we can that parameters we implemented was applied.

on both sides and uh negotiation between client and server performed well uh and of course I used all the tools during my tuning procedure and also I had to utilize standard Linux tools like MPSTAT, PIDStat, Perftop, Iostash, To observe that the system is not overloaded and everything is going well. So, how to read the results? Um so for UNET 3D workflow workload, uh the f there are two figures. The first figure is that uh the master's. Maximum uh GPU simulated when I I've got success uh pass of the test. And the second figure is the average GPU utilization for such number of GPU. Uh uh and for unit unit three D workload I measured additional Uh g g C PU uh uh load uh generated by NFS or SMB server on the uh on the uh my storage server side. For checkpointing work workload I measured uh checkpoint safe and checkpoint. lot performance and uh and uh again I collected CPU average CPU utilization time, uh locu util uh CPU load and also I sometimes I ran simple VO workload with sequential reader writes. for double check and to understand the maximum performance of protocol uh until um some conditions. And o all the results has been routed for the easier of the s understanding. So let's start from our server. So before I started uh uh with uh an ML perf, I Tuned my back-end storage based off the rate uh rate because understanding the workload, understanding the quidps and average block size, I was able to uh set up the rate correctly. And then I compared XFS and uh XFS with default mount uh. And make a fest options and with optimized options for uh my workloads.

So here you can see that my file system was able uh in for in the best case with XFS optimized. For my file system I was able to simulate 22 H store H100 at GPUs uh at uh average utilization level uh of ninety four percent. And checkpoints uh uh load and uh checkpoint save speed was about twenty eight gigabytes per second, which is uh the uh half of the total performance of my backend storage. Okay, let's move. Fur further for NFS server options, the uh the there are about f f four or five different options in NFS configuration file which impact the performance and the most influential option is instant is the number of NFS threads. By default, Linux uh pro uh has eight NFS D threads we which is not enough for high performance NFS storage and my recommendation is to set this uh amount uh equal to number of efficient CPU cores. Sometimes it could be uh less, especially when we have some high performance back-end storage uh which requires some CPU resources uh but up uh i i in my uh according to my experience it's not to it's not efficient to set count more than real count of CPU cores. So you can observe the results. So increasing the number, the count of NFSD threads, we can see almost linear performance. improvements for read operations, for training workload and for FIO sequential reads.

But when I uh set na sec of NFS D threads to ninety six, which is twice of F, and then the first time we have a f Uh twice of real CPU course I saw that the performance degraded, so I was able to run uh simulation of nine or ten uh NVIDIA H100 GPU accelerators and the total uh CPU load increased up to ninety percent. And for checkpoint operations I stack at uh s seven point three gigabytes per second for writes and about s seventeen gigabytes per second for reads and this means I need further tuning for checkpoint. Operation. So here you can see some examples of MPT stats and PID stats for uh NFS uh threads equal to one. Uh system is very inefficient because we are limit we load only one CPU course. But with uh NFS uh Uh th threads equal to ninety six, which is uh twice of CPU uh core count, uh we overload the system with NFSD threads. Um so some outcomes defaults are not enough and uh my uh uh Uh uh m one of my recommendation is to set the number of NFS threads equal to number of effici effective CPU cores. Sometimes you need to uh do less. Uh take a look at the your system load, but it's general General recommendations and uh uh there are different parameters of of an FS configuration file. I described them in the in the appendix to the slide deck. So when we are dealing with checkpointing, we have a lot of uh small sync operations. That's why I saw No performance improvement with NFSD count incre increasement. And uh there are two ways to improve point speed. First one is to uh disable W delay option of NFS D server because by default Linux NFSD is a very important.

The server uh uh uh has uh V Delay option on uh for write colour thing uh but this uh increases the sync latency a lot. And the second uh option is is to uh move from sync mode of uh NFS server to async. So here we can comp see cooperation between uh NFSD server working in uh with standard uh V Delay option enabled and with uh s uh no V Delay parameter enabled. We uh provo uh which allow uh uh allow allows me to improve the checkpoint performance almost two times. And as for async options, I see s uh slightly better performance, but on practice it tends to be unstable on more powerful system based on 400 gig interfaces. So I decided to stay on sync mode with no V delay of uh parameters set. And of course we need to uh tune some NFS client parameters. And let's start from the NFS kernel model parameters. I have some recipes. I spare about one month uh f finding the best or uh the best uh para uh the best um numbers for each the parameters and mo most influential parameter is m uh max session slot, which uh means the maximum number of host static. Request negotiated by client and by default uh most of Linux uh distribution has this parameter set of sixty four, which again is not enough for high performance read and write operations. And I recommended to increase it at least two times. And uh this uh allows the To imp improve training at checkpoint operation 15 to 30 percent.

So for my installations, I I saw about 15 percent improvement, but my kernel was I I I was using custom kernel with uh default parameters uh uh uh which is not equal to the default parameters of mo of merger Linux distrib distribution and for uh and comparing with default kernel provided by Ubuntu The difference is is about thirty percent. So and the most influential parameters is client mount options. So there are two client mount options uh which uh impact performance a lot. The first one is In Connect. Uh uh the number of parallel TCP or RDMA connection to one uh server IP for a given mount and the second one is Max Connect, which allow us to uh get session twunking across multiple server IPs. And uh so uh working with high performance client, you can just set easily and connect to sixteen, which is the maximum possible parameters. And in in case you have uh m multiple I Ps, you just need to spread uh this sixteen connection across all the IPs. So I have several uh and to uh and to examples for single IP. TCP connection, single dual PC TCP connection and FDMA based connection. So um T C P and con uh T C P multi streaming uh allow me allows to me to increase read performance linery and as you can see uh uh this parameter impact more on write performance than on read performance. Lo t take a look at cheaper write speed. So uh with uh T C P multi streaming I was able to get the almost the same performance for write piece uh for write operation as I got for with uh RDMA connection.

And having two ports and uh using Max uh uh uh and using um NFS multi-tracking, I was able to twice the read performance. Okay. So and it's time to talk about SMB. So Ned, can you take your part? Thank you. Hi folks. Um so I know you probably wouldn't be considering In an all-Linux environment, just SMB wouldn't typically come up as a conversation, right? SMB has traditionally been a Windows protocol and a Mac OS protocol for the last 10 years. And NFS would be your place to go. But what you found out this week, thanks to Sergei and Zenor going through, is doing some actual comparison work with a modern SMB 3.1.1. Implementation and sort of stacking it up with the exact same benchmarks and workloads, and found some pretty interesting results. If you're not familiar with SMB, like I said, it's the native protocol of Windows and Mac for remote file access. It's more type of directory and Kerberos. I have multi-channel, which is very similar to what the multi-path piece that was in NFS. It has RDMA support. And these things have been there for a long time. You probably have been to some SDCs when these things came out around 12, 13 years ago. You might remember me from when I worked at Microsoft and worked on these things. Now, obviously, I work somewhere else. You get a lot of really sort of built-in niceties of high availability with SMB in a modern world with transparent failover, sometimes called continuous availability, and scale-out.

So you have these things called persistent handles, where we retain information about handles from clients and can share them between servers and a cluster. So, that the loss of a node doesn't result in loss of I/O or interruption in service for your app or your copy or your read or whatever. And that's useful things in a world of AI workflow where you're just pushing a lot of data, a lot of data, and hoping to, like Sergei pointed out, keep focusing. Focused on the thinking of AI, keeping the GPUs busy, especially when there's service interruptions. Because the less time you are spending burning up those GPUs, the less your AI stuff is making any money for anybody. Things get, if you were in the last VAS presentation, which was very interesting. About talking about multi-protocol access. It was talking about the difficulties of transforming security between three different systems, but it's just as tiresome between two. NFS and SMB have completely different security models. In our case, we will actually support doing POSIX as well as Windows X. But our customers typically want to use Windows ACLs. They're typically using Active Directory. This is a ubiquitous system. And there are advantages to that ACL model that were around the granularity, inheritance, denies, things like that. Maybe those things are important to. Machine learning and AI? Maybe not. I've seen plenty of discussions and demos of AI stuff at, say, Supercompute. And hopefully, you'll join us there in a few months. Where security and access control seemed to be the last thing on anybody's mind.

It was all just about how much can. Push, what's the throughput? What's the fastest way I can go? But these are options for people who do care. And one hopes that people in the AI world would begin to care more about this. So, a few things that we did. So, what's important here to understand is: this is not Windows clients. All these numbers come from an Ubuntu to an Ubuntu. The Ubuntu server is running Fusion SMB, an SMB server, and then the client's just running the built-in SIFS kernel client. Steve French might be in here somewhere, his code. Okay? We did make some modifications. To up these are things that are not necessarily default in Linux. We had to make quite a few tuning options. Upping the multi-channel count, upping the SMB max credits count. In order to try and push RDMA and the multi-channels past their defaults, Windows does a little bit more. Self-tuning here. Linux, you really have to get in there and make settings based on the workload. And if we, I think everybody in here understands the difference between TCP and RDMA at this point. Maybe 10 years ago you might not have, but the idea here is to try and do as much RDMA as possible. Possible to offload the work on the client and the server. So instead of thinking about transmission, it's thinking about what the actual work is being done. That's especially important in these machine learning GPU environments where there's so much CPU being chewed up by everything. We want to be a minimum part of the problem. So I'm almost at the point of showing some numbers here, hang with me.

Just so you understand what we're dealing with from the Fusion side, this is a user mode. We also offer kernel mode server. But it's for Linux. It really is like sort of a direct competitor with A Windows file server, for example. But we also support x64, ARM, PPC. And our goal is to push the throughput as much as possible. Like our goal is always around performance. That's how this product was built: performance at scale. So we, you know, the theoretical limit of An RDMA 100 gigabit connection is 12.5 gigabytes a second. We try to get as close to that number as possible. Right now, our number is around 11 and a half. It's pretty close, getting pretty close to the max. So if you buy 100 gigabit, 200 gigabit, 400 gigabit, 800 gigabit now for Mellanox, our goal is to basically make it so that your complaints are about About Sergei and his storage need to keep up because the networks are getting so wide now that we're back to the storage being perhaps the bottleneck. So, I did not want to put in too many specific numbers in here because we were still. Playing with this up until yesterday afternoon, but we will publish this set of things we found that worked perfectly well for Sergei on docs.tuxera.com, where we keep all of our perf tuning guidelines. But we have a ton of areas in Fusion where you're allowed to make similar changes like you can with NFSD or Ganesha or any other. File server, right?

Heavily around transport threads, VFS, op locks, and credits are areas here that all substantially influenced how the performance went when we actually compared the same workloads with NFS and SMB. And then, like I said before, on the client, on Windows, you actually have very few options to tune any of this stuff. But on Linux, there are more. And it turns out you should tune them. The defaults were not sufficient for us. We kept finding bottlenecks just out of the out-of-box configuration. So raising multi-channel and max channels. Upping the max credits. Finding a good mix of that for the workload and the type of, it was 128k, I think, I/O sizes was key during this exercise down in the I.O. lab downstairs. And there are other settings here. From the Linux side around the cache. I'll let you read these offline because it's not super exciting. So you're just using the regular mount command. This is not using the SMB client add-on or anything like this. It's native Linux kernel. SIFS client. And we're just mounting it with, you know, SIFS, aka, please stop saying SIFS, it's SMB, but it's SIFS in Linux. Mount point with forcing a version 3.1.1, making sure that we specify multi-channel being on, which is again, not By default. And setting max channels, setting a higher credit number. And we did the same thing with RDMA because you can specify here. In the case of Windows, if you were doing all this, it would see RDMA and just be like, oh, you must want to use RDMA. Well, I'm not going to bother with TCP here. You must be specific. And so these numbers look pretty good.

And I have, you know, I've I struggle sometimes to understand how all this UNET 3D stuff works out because I'm not an ML perf person by any stretch of the imagination. But you can see we are pushing with multi-channel on this first run. Around 20 to 22 gigabytes per second, which is a pretty substantial number. Remember, this is two two hundreds, so that number is pretty high. And then, working together, we made some further tuning. Pieces here, and I believe these were more around and we got up to eventually on dual port 48 gigabytes a second. And if you remember back to the NFS slides before. That is a pretty substantial number when compared. So, if you look at these right here, you might guess over the years, and if I had had to put money down on it, I would have bet on NFS winning in these numbers. But that is not the case. The SB performance was actually better. Under a number of circumstances. So, and because SMB has been now native inside of Linux for a long time, it's no longer this add-on experience or second-class experience. Arguably, you could say it'd be better to be using SMB on Linux than NFS for these workloads. Yes, I think they're great. Was your right for SMB with a synchronous style right? You have to tell me this one, Sergei. I don't know. Tell me. Yeah, strictly, yeah, I keep on using the. Yeah, come up come up here to the mic. So the question was about uh w did I use sync writes SSP. Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely, yes. I used only sync writes with object options enabled always all the tests. That is my last slide. Yeah, absolutely.

So uh as you can see that SMB is quite good. Those were the SMB direct credits, I think, if I remember right. Is that right, Bastion? We were playing with SMB direct credits. Were we using just SMB or not the direct ones? Okay, then they were just regular ones. You should play with that. Yeah, we should, actually. By default, it's really small. Yeah, we were running around quite a bit for the last 24 hours. There's probably more to be squeezed, yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's why I didn't want to necessarily. publish my numbers yet until we are totally happy with yes yes sir which kernel versions were tested uh s so I used customized kernel 6.16 with NFS so I I had to enable some features for example uh by default Ubuntu kernel have d disabled SMB direct, so I had to recompile kernel with SMB direct. Only on the client, not on the server. Yeah, yeah. And for also I performed some NFS local I/O tests, and again I had to enable the USB. It was otherwise 2404. Pretty vanilla. Um did you try increasing the tribal count on the R E M A Grand Force for NFS as well? Uh no. Michael Per uh I noticed you were s turning up the uh R size and L E size. So yeah, for client for terminal version uh six four and seventeen it's supported. It was yeah, client side. At least uh I'm not sure I I I did not um upset The real transfer size, but NFS stats demonstrated to me that it was increased to 4 mega. It sounds like pretty recently, like very recently. Yeah, it wasn't supported in the server before 15, 16. Yeah, yeah, it wasn't supported in the server. Okay, thanks.

So uh as we can see uh SMB demonstrated really uh surprising results and but NFS has some yeah NFS has some hidden A's. So NFS has NFS local I.O. allowing us to bypass RPCs and to get really good performance in case client and server side are ba uh placed on the same server. And inside the configuration we can when we need to um build high performance solution when we should write and read data directly and at fast performance from one server and to provide some ability to read and write data from uh third-party server uh we have an option to pass the block device directly to the data. To client side and to uh mount this device uh with standard file system and then remount it with NFS. This uh uh gives us g great performance improvement and here you can see some additional cooperation. So uh with NFS or LDMA or RDMA, I was able to get performance equal to local file system performance. If you remember from my one of my first slides and with NFS or TCP I was able to achieve almost the same uh performance as a Local file system performance. So, for some configuration, we will need to provide high-performance NFS server to one server and not so performance NFS share to another server. So, we can uh build some disaggregated storage to pro to pass some block storage directly to client side and to rema mount it with NFS. Direct option. NFS local are your options enabled. So I have in my next evaluation.

So I'm going to prove the performance and stability on a bigger and more realistic topology with more client and server nodes and maybe with uh fine tuned uh four hundred gig network. So I'm going to run my next uh evaluation, having two storage nodes for at least four clients and to compare uh SMB and NFS again with uh Uh more tuning options with maybe I will tune some RDMA uh settings uh because uh uh up to now uh network tuning was out of scope of my work. Uh I d I I understand that NF uh RDMA uh tuning and network tuning can um impact a lot but uh I used my customized kernel and it was not easy to build uh uh m Mellanox Docker Fed drivers uh for my kernel so I decided not to touch the cur the existing network and to use with default parameters. So I think that's that's all. I have a a lot of slides describing a lot of additional settings, but the most influential setting we describe during our presentations. Uh can we come back to the head of best comparison between a faster S and B? Uh yes, okay, sure. T C P or D M A? Um well either. Yeah. I think so uh interesting observation. C P so even though S and B is better, or CPU goal goes up In this particular benchmark, you're just doing AO, right? Yeah. Uh in a more realistic scenario with these nodes that are doing AO uh they also be doing computer models. Uh yes, but uh uh this is cpu utilization from storage side. I d did not ma I I don't provide here the TPU utilization of the client side because the most of CPU was consumed by uh uh accelerator simulation.

So is it is it fair to say that even though CB is faster, it is at the cost of additional No, you take half the CPU. Because of the number of S and P takes half I I mean that's the two cells have to be taken off it. Some of it would be a differently but it's half the CPU of NFS. Yeah, it's quite the principles, twice the CPU of the College of Communications. Yeah, but yeah, but but but half of the half correct. So forty six possibilities for L sorry, the second row of the file, but yeah, second row, yeah. NFS yeah, and the the main reason that uh NFS was provi NFS was providing much lower performance. No not and uh uh NFS server had much lower load. Because with NFS I was able, for example, comparing first two um uh row uh col uh columns uh I was able to run. only three uh GPU simulated for NFS and seven GPU simulated for SMB. And uh that's why I've got more than two times lar larger uh w workload to SMB server uh which uh of course um Increase the CPU utilization. As you have more simulated GPUs, the throughput over the network grows uh proportionally. So when you go from three simulated GPUs to six simulated GPUs, you're pushing through about twice as much data. For reads, I think that's that's it, that's what you point out. It's optimally consuming volume. For writes, it's previce versus I don't know why that would be the case, right? So it's it's anything specific to your assembly implementation that's optimized for writes but not for reads? That's what I see here, that's right, that's important.

Well I think that's the only thing that's not typically with us seeing any SA implementation right now. Temple for this in this case, right? Unit 3D. So it's does one by Greek sun write both cases, training as a lasting point. That means the IO pattern we have seen. But assume it would be exact same IO sizes, both cases. So that's why I asked that question. So ideally it should be comparable, right. Yeah, okay, yeah. You hopefully aren't doing DCP in these areas, so we're gonna have to do it. So, one interesting number would be CPU. Virtualization for buy it. Yeah, I think cycle provider. Yes, that we should see that it has some reduced compared to similarities in that sort of cycle. I'm just looking at the last column. It does 46% as a case that is 51. It's actually higher than that. I believe you would at least remove the networking part of it, assuming it's hard to do. No, yeah, it's it's wasted money there. So cycles per mite is flat between the S B single board and middle board, but it's different with NFS as it rises. Right? It goes from thirty-three to sixty-five. Right, twenty-four is about half of fifty-one. So it's flat, which is good. That's what's expected with RD. And I mean when I when I remember the presentation what RD made back in two thousand whatever about they mostly said okay the reason for this is um that we need to save site for the time just for Yeah, Azure at that will be at that point. Now for GPUs. Um having those statistics would be great if you know whatever the future of our product.

That is the other part here is the fact that on the client, in theory, uh this EPU usage of like the main board we're not able to use our GPUs at all, right? Theoretically there's two sets of CPU numbers here, one of which don't matter to us and we can't provide very well. I it's probably not free. I'm sure that Intel or AMD would tell me how super not free it is to have lots of paper flow between DPU types and stuff. But There's the question now in the world of this AI workload about how much you care about the system to do the network transport. RDBA certainly I would continue to keep pushing it, saying that it's ideal, but it's probably not as likely. crazy prairie localization before because you were in contention for this thing before it's all workload and everything. And now the workload isn't actually using this. So let's say it's fifty percent higher on this computer than it's otherwise not used. Uh in this case it's not true because they have a workable system that's not crackable. Uh I would call my baby the it'll be my stuff. Uncle or call it my uncle? It's uh the ML perf uh benchmark design simulate the actual I've learned so much a lot about her in the last twenty four hours and before. Yeah, it's a bit more of the client side, so we just went Python more to simple explains. But so it shouldn't matter. The other aspect I think maybe I don't have to really pay attention, right? Uh uh it's interesting that the assembly form is much better, so I don't know how much of it is uh due to the protocol part.

NFST is all transport, right, versus in this case Multi Chan, you have different channels for the index right for RDA, right? Yeah, not how much is implementation of RDA. How much of it is implementation versus the protocol itself, right? It's clearly a combination of benefits, right? The protocols are different, but most of the time, Multi-channel smooth synerupts and events across the secondary effects occur. You can load the machine with a server on Windows NFS4 on your server, which of course all of Windows, and then you can also run S4. And some implementation-specific difference where emery the protocol, its limitations or advantages are the same. I argue that maybe this workload is protocol is very minimal, given that these are larger items, right? So even with NFL the overhead of that is very small, right? Uh It is possible also for the hacker size that we've seen here and what it's very different so like NFS aren't facility or not. So don't stop R2 installed or be on here? Um it's possible here that NFS is RPC Um the way they're handling packet sizes, equation, other things here um very well vary for multiple SPL and stuff. And I'd rather have to learn up there or less save interesting to actually look at a wire capture. RDMA has a transport, so they use same for PC. I RBC. OSS SMB has a separate channel for just reads and write over RDMA and rest of this stuff is physical. Is it for small packets also? I thought we well they use the same RDMA connection, but okay. Is that what you mean by channel? Yeah.

Yeah, because there's an SMB channel as well, but that's slightly different. That's a higher level infrastructure. So but do all the SMB request flags responses use RDMA center or we reme center? When running over RDMA they use the RDMA connection. They perform direct place But that's it's a pure read-write word car. There's no metadata. If you have to remind those case or the placement of the tag called tagged operation. And you write a whole metadata thing. That's part of where NFS, like PNFS and stuff, would take the crap out of us. If it mattered, it's purple it does. Okay, I think we're out of the time. One more question.
