SNIA SDC 2025 - Can SDXI Work with NVMe?

All right, I think we're ready to get started. So my name is Jason Mollegaard, and I'm up here with Sean Iyer. If you were here for the previous session, you would recognize that he's still here. So Sean works at Dell. I work at Solodime. And together we are co-chairs of the SDXI and Computational Storage Subgroup at SNIA. So, a little bit about this subgroup. We are both members of Computational Storage Twig and SDXI Twig. And the intent of this group is to kind of explore. The combination of NVMe, SDXI, and computational storage and how all of those could play together. And some of our objectives for this subgroup include looking at block diagrams of that combination because it does seem kind of like a strange combination. Why would we want to combine SDXI and computational storage? Computational storage and NVMe, but actually, I think the reasons are very straightforward. We've got all of the benefits that William just described in the previous session about STXI that now we could apply to computational storage applications or computational storage drive, among other things. Also, been looking at block diagrams for that combination, as well as considering if we need enhancements to NVMe in order to support that. But our most recent effort is around a white paper discussing the combination of NVMe and SDXI. And there are no changes needed for NVMe at all. With kind of what we've been exploring and what we're proposing in this white paper.

And that's the essence of our presentation today: to kind of talk about this white paper and what we've been doing, what we've been exploring, and kind of the conclusions that we have reached thus far. So, the goal is to. To describe the combination of SDXI and all the benefits that we've just heard that SDXI brings, along with in terms of data movement and transformations and the widely adopted NVMe standard, right? We all know that NVMe is used in SSDs today. And a big part of that NVMe drive is data movement. There is some DMA operation that happens to move data from host to device and vice versa on writes and reads. And so why not consider SDXI for that operation? And this is where computational storage comes into play. SDXI supports these transformations that we heard about. Now, suddenly, that same data movement in and out of the drive could have a transformation as well, and it becomes effectively a computational storage operation. So, some of the benefits that we're exploring and could be realized with. This combination, you pick up all of the benefits that SDXI brings to the table, like user space addressing, memory targets, data transformations that I just mentioned, virtualization features, and the extensibility. And obviously, there's lots of extensibility that's being built into 1.1, which is great news. And it makes it very straightforward to extend it to do whatever we might want to do in a drive.

So, our white paper, from kind of a high-level overview perspective, we have an NVMe overview so that anybody who's maybe not familiar with it can get a refresher on that. To insult your intelligence about that in today's presentation. I'm sure most everyone here is that, but just a level set for the audience that's going to be reading that paper. SDXI overview, we'd heard from William and Sean, but Sean will give a quick update on that. And then we've got application write I/O flow. So, how would we use SDXI in a write operation with NVMe? We've got the read I/O flow, so again, how would we use SDXI with an NVMe read? Peer-to-peer, certainly we can do a lot of stuff with peer-to-peer, especially if we can address the memory, which, if you saw a presentation yesterday, There's new ways that are coming that would allow that memory to be accessible, and now suddenly you can use STXI to move data in and out of it. Security, we can't ignore security. That's always a hot-button topic in everything, and we'll touch on that as well. So, that's roughly the outline of our presentation, but like I said, I Said, starting with the NVMe introduction, I'm not going to insult your intelligence. I think most everyone here probably knows how it works. But the key detail that I want you to take away from this slide is there's data movement with NVMe, and we all know that. And the STXI is a data mover. So, you know, we should consider how we can apply that for. Of that data movement. All right, I'm going to turn it over to Sean.

He's going to kind of talk about SDXI briefly and then take us through the flows. So I think, is it two mics now? Okay. So I think we already covered SDXI in the previous session, so I'm I'm assuming many of you were there. Was there anybody not there in the previous session? Okay. In that case, I think we can certainly skip this entirely. Just the key thing that I would note is there's pictures. There's a lot more pictures in the spec. So you can use this picture as a reference. Take a note that we're not talking about something just implements in a CPU. It can be implemented, STXI can be implemented in an I/O device, a storage device, an accelerator device. It can target different kinds of memory. This is kind of going into the aspect of when you build something architectural and form fact. Independent, then you can imagine where you want to place it for the efficient system that you are trying to build. So let's go through some of the flows. And this is one example of how NVMe and STXI can kind of. Be combined in some ways that you can get the benefit of both standards. And kind of preparing some of these flows, we didn't have to change the STXI spec. We did not have to modify the NVMe spec. But we can just take the two standard specifications that are openly available, put them side by side, and you can look at this and say this is entirely possible. Entirely feasible. And that's what we are trying to do in terms of educating the audience and the developers in terms of the flow.

So, for example, you look at the picture here and you see a CPU topology or NVMe controller topology, and then there's memory associated with the CPUs, which is commonly system memory, but system memory can encompass. As a whole bunch of things. But just for simplicity's sake, if I can say that there is device memory associated with the NVMe controller and the NVM subsystem, and you can imagine an STXI-architectored data mower somewhere sitting in between this type of topology, now you can start seeing. How you can move data between the system memory and the device memory using an LTXI device. And you can also do data transformations. So, whether when it's doing a read flow or a write flow, you can imagine that the host can issue an STXI descriptor, which describes a memory copy. From a source location to a destination memory location. And in this case, if we are trying to do a write flow, the source location is system memory and the destination is in the device memory. So the device memory could be. CMB in NVMe controllers or the PMR memory region. CMB stands for controller memory buffer and PMR is persistent memory regions. I think those who have familiarity with NVMe will understand that it's basically device memory that is exposed to a system and it's host addressable. So the moment you make a memory Host addressable, an STXI device that is part of your system topology can access it. So it can access it the same way that you can access your DRAM memory.

So now when you passed in a descriptor saying my source memory is DRAM memory and destination memory is device memory, it made the data transfer from system memory to the device. Device memory. Now the data is already there in the device memory. So if you issue an NVMe write command referencing the source data in the CMB PMR memory and issue the write command, then it gets committed to flash. So this is how you combine an STXI-based data move. Which basically flows the data from system memory to device memory, followed by an NVMe write command, which basically flushes it to the flush. Right? So while you're copying it from system memory to the device memory, you may also perform interesting data transformation operations. Think compression, think encryption. But there's a whole bunch of other things, right? So I'm just giving an example, but this is the power of having a memory data transformer engine as part of your topology that gives you the same benefits of attaching a look-up accelerator to your. NVMe flow. Now you think about it from the reverse side of it, where you're basically using STXI to do the read of the data. And so to do that, basically the host now does the opposite, which issues an NVMe read command and issues a read command to get the data from Flash into To the CMB PMR region. So it's still not left the device, it's still in the device memory. But the fact that it moved to the CMB or PMR memory, it's now host addressable, which means the host can now issue an STXI memory descriptor to point to the source data in the device.

Memory and make the destination address the system memory. And while it's bringing it back, it can do the reverse data transformations of what it did when it was trying to send the data back into Flash. So this is the kind of example of how a read can complement the write side of it, and also an example of. Of how NVMe flows can be complemented with the help of STXI. So, in doing this, we didn't have to change the STXI spec, we didn't have to change the NVMe spec, but then you just basically combine them together and you get these flows. All right, so thank you, Sham. So, just a few benefits that we Highlight that we identified through our investigation. So, obviously, Sean already mentioned it. I mentioned as well about the transformations. We can manipulate the data as it's being transferred to the MVME device, which is a new capability that we would not otherwise have. That certainly is a big one. STXI, we already heard in the previous presentation, it's designed for memory access, it's designed for memory ordering intricacies and other aspects of the data movement that an ordinary generic DMA engine that is probably in use in your controller today probably doesn't support. And so you pick up all this capability thanks to SDXI. And in general, without question, we think that SDXI reduces buffer copies because of the capabilities that it provides in terms of the enhancements and transformations. All right, I mentioned security. Security early on, so certainly we want to touch on that as that's always important. We've taken a look at it.

I know that from the SDXI standard perspective, they've had security experts review that, and there's obviously some degree of confidence that they've tried to turn over all the rocks in terms of making sure that SDXI. SDXI is secure and not going to be a problem. So, from a combination perspective, we think that the materially unchanged. That if we're using SDXI with our NVMe, that the system as a whole is just as secure afterwards. As it was before. So, not a lot of change from that standpoint, which is good news. We don't want it to become less secure by any means. But Sean already touched on a couple of things that are enabled thanks to SDXI related to security. So, you know, SDXI enables isolation of memory addresses. Known as an air gap. And this is certainly a common practice to separate different address spaces in security. So STXI would support that. That's probably not readily supported in a generic DMA engine. STXI, as Sean mentioned, can also encrypt data. And we're not proposing that this is a replacement for self-encrypting drives or link encryption like PCIe, IEDE, or anything like that. But it certainly brings a new capability to the table that your traditional generic DMA does not support. Maybe this is part of the security solution. That you, as part of your data movement, that you're using the SDXI encryption as one of the transformations. Certainly something to keep in mind. All right, so to kind of conclude our presentation, we're working on this white paper.

And we think that the SDXI brings a lot to the table in terms of enhancements and capabilities that would not otherwise exist. Our intent was to have that white paper finished by today by SDC. However, things always go slower than you think, so it is still in progress. If this is interesting to you, we would still welcome your input. Another set of eyes to review what we have and encourage you to come join us and help us get it completed. Barring that, we do expect to have it done soon, hopefully in the next few weeks. And at that point, of course, we'll make it available to the community. That folks who are designing their systems can take into consideration new architectures that involve NVMe and SDXI. All right, so with that, we can take some questions, if there are any. Yes. Can I ask a question? You may. How does the IOMMU play into some of this? Okay. So I think in the flows that we talked about, yes, okay. The question was: how does the IOMMU play? Play into this picture. In the flows that we were talking about, we have put STXI outside of the NVM subsystem. Now, there is certainly a possibility that STXI is within an NVM subsystem, but to keep it a little bit of a clear Security posture, that's what we were trying to do in the first version of this white paper, where we don't materially change the security architecture or the posture, we kept STXI outside the NVM subsystem. And today, while STXI, the way STXI plays, you, And you get IOMMU to help it with multiple address space separation. And we retain that.

So whenever you're accessing system memory, you are going to go through IOMMU. When you're accessing device memory, it has been Blessed by the privileged software. And that's the case when you are actually saying you're issuing an MEME write command or a read command to get the data into CMB or from CMB or PMR memory, it has already been blessed to be in that region. And so now when you provide Provide that memory access to another entity, so it's a peer device then, that can access from it. And then it, when it sends it to the system memory, it goes through the IOMU translations. Thank you. I have a follow-up question similar to I. Just helping my understanding. How does the OS memory controller fit into the whole picture? Like, is it completely or blockaded or not related? Or if you brought out a block diagram, how does the standard OS memory controller look fit in? So, yeah. Question is: How does the OS memory controller fit into this picture? Did you mean the memory controller or like the MMU or like the memory manager? So, just a let me elaborate a little bit. Maybe I'm asking a very dumb question, right? I follow your context switching about the VM app to app migration that is awesome, right? Yeah. So typically, like let's say you don't have something like SD DXI, right? Then you need to call the OS and the OS will go figure out all these mapping, right? Almost under the assumption the OS memory kernel, right? The OS kernel memory will be part of this, right? Yeah. So I was just wondering, like, let's say you use SDXI, is it like mutually exclusive or you allow both?

And how discounted is the end? No, so it's very similar to how, let's say, you have a NIC or an I/O device, and you have, I mean, typically, if you provide an address to DMA, to a device, and an I. Device, you would provide the physical address. In a little bit more modern architectures of devices, you can provide a virtual address that can get translated using IOMMU. And that's the question that he was asking Barrow on page table translations. So the IOMU tables are managed by privileged software. You are not bypassing the privileged software mechanisms to provide address-based translation to I/O devices. The only thing that this gives you as a benefit is that you are now relying on protections of guest virtual address space. To guest physical and/host virtual address to host physical address-based translations that are provided by the IOMMU hardware. And so you get the added benefit of hardware translating it for you as you provide it to a device to DMA from. Well as far as use cases go beyond what you know kind of the the C and D use cases you described, are there others that you've seen that potentially could you know Have SDXI be a better vehicle to move data between, say, NVV and memory? So, the question is: besides CMB, is there another vehicle to move data between the device memory and host memory? ACCMB is one that works today. There was a presentation yesterday about making subsystem local memory, SLM, host addressable. So that becomes another memory that could be addressed by SDXI and you could move data in and out of it.

And certainly, if you had data in other Drives in your system, and you needed to move them to this particular to one particular drive for a reason, computational storage being one such reason. You wanted to do some operation on the data and you needed to get everything co-located. You could potentially use the SDXI to do that data movement from those neighboring peer drives and get them over. To this one location. I think that's certainly an interesting combination from my perspective. Just to kind of extend, because we are in the magic memory track, the CXL memory is also a system-addressable memory, so you can put the two. Two together. It's possibly a very dumb question, but let's say you're doing a write-to-do an ME device, and you have that address available in IO. So you want to do a zero copyright in a traditional system, right? And now you don't Need to do any data transformation. Does SDX, and if you used SDXI to do sort of the copy to the CMD memory and then had the drive using that address, would that be an extra copy from the drive script, like from the sort of overall memory bandwidth or drive perspective? Or would that, or is that sort of because Behind the scenes happening anyway in a zero copy. Like, I'm more for kind of JSON thinking about how a drive actually works. Right. So, to answer your question, it isn't an extra copy because we're already DMAing the data to the drive some kind of a way. So, we're just doing it a different way with SDXI and providing some new. Capabilities. And so, to kind of also think about it differently, right?

If you're moving it to a PMR region, in that case, some cases you might even think about it as it has been moved, and then you are sending the NVMe command as part of. An async op that completes. So in that case, the data pointer in the unique thing points to the address of the syncretic point. Yes. As opposed to like a the mailing of the unique. Right, you're going to have a data pointer that posts your name. Correct. Exactly. Yep, so to ask I'll try to repeat it. So the the comment and discussion was about that the data pointer would point to the the CMB as opposed to somewhere in host memory and that that is correct. The MPP controller recognizes that and just does an internal transfer. It never hits the bus, correct? All right, well, I think we're almost at time, so thank you everyone for attending.
