SNIA SDC 2025 - Beyond Throughput: Benchmarking Storage for the Complex I/O Patterns of AI with MLPerf Storage and DLIO

I am Hui Huo Chen. I'm from Argon National Lab. Another role that I play is the ML Perf Search Working Group Co-Chair. I'm one of the three co-chairs. And today I'm going to talk about our efforts in benchmarking storage for AI. The title says Beyond Throughput: Benchmarking Storage for the Complex I/O patterns of AI and M. storage and DLIO. This title is generated by ChatGPT. I provide all the context, figure out what is the best title. And I think it gave me a very satis satisfactory answer. Particularly I like this beyond throughput. I came from the HPC environment initially, and what we care about is the throughput, right? Even compute is the fraud number. IO is the bandwidth or IO ops that we can get. But when we step into the world of AI, we found that that this metrics Kind of like not that good anymore. And you will see more and more later on in the talk. And just a little bit of information about the Argonne National Lab. I am from the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility. Many of you may heard about the Aurora, which is one of the three exascale computing system. It has 60,000 Intel PVC GPUs. And what is more related to this audience is the storage system that we have. the uh Dells uh for a short term for distributed asynchronous object store system. And the capacity of that is uh about 200 petabyte. And then the theoretical peak that we aim at is uh 30 terabyte per second. It includes 1000 Dell server, but so far we only have like 200 set it up for the user. In later November this year, I believe that we will have the whole system set it up.

Aurora, we also have an NVIDIA machine called Polaris, which contains 2000 NVIDIA A100 GPU, and we also have a lot of some smaller kind of more advanced NVIDIA GPU system for our testbed. And besides that, we also have Have quite a few AI testbacks. Argon is assigned by DOE to kind of lead the effort of AI. So we have Cerebra, Samanova, GraphCore, and GraphRec. And we are constantly kind of looking for new AI testbacks. And basically, the first As a way for we provide these computing resources for scientists, for and faculty members in the university, they can apply our allocation program and they can use our machine for free. This is a purely open for open science. Um and my another role is the uh co-chair of the MLPer for Solid Working Group. And this I believe if I remember correctly it was uh it started in 2021 but when I joined it was uh already kind of one year after it started. Started. I wasn't aware of the storage benchmarking effort. I had been doing the storage benchmarking. I developed the DRIO code, which I will talk later on. And then my manager figured out this effort and then asked me to join. And then since then, I joined. And then later on On the DRIO become one of the kind of back-end software for this benchmarking effort. I put a lot of logo here. I don't know whether it includes everybody here. If you are not there, make sure to follow the link, join our working group. If you are already there but not on this slide, talk To me, afterwards. We have constantly have new members joining, and this working group is growing.

Even the number of submitters you will see later on grow a lot in the past few years. And so, today, what I'm going to talk about is: first, I will start with overall. View on the top level view, like what is the interesting thing of storaging I/O, particularly in the context of AI? And also probably has a little bit of flavor on the HPC environment or in the DOE, Department of Energy space, or AI. For science space. And then I will talk about how we designed this DLIO and later on include it in this MLPO storage community benchmarking efforts and some lessons we learned. And the lessons I learned will be a little bit more technical. I was told, this is my first. Time joining this conference, and the organizer told me that this is a very technical conference. So, make sure to talk about technical things, not just the higher-level things. So, then I provide some technical things. Hopefully, you like it. And in At Argonne or in the DOE space, we have this allocation program called InSight. I have also another program called ALCC. And this other allocation program that university professor or scientist apply for our resources. And we have, they submit a proposal, and if the proposal is good, Their software is ready for using the HPC system, they will be awarded. And this is the percentage of the AI among all those proposals. Basically, those proposals, whichever has the AI component divided by the overall submission, and you can see. See a growth across the year, right? And basically, it started in 2017.

And that is the year kind of deep learning becomes more and more popular in the science space. I remember I attended the American Physical Society annual meeting. I was a physics. Postal during that time at Argonne National Lab. And then I found out that those AI kind of rooms are fully packed, even the hallway are packed. But those traditional, like, medial science simulations, density functional theory, are kind of not too many people. Now, at that time, I know that AI is kind of gradually growing up, right? But many scientists at Argonne still kind of skeptical whether this really works or not until maybe large language model comes up. And that's in the time frame of 2022, 2023. and we start to catch up. And this you can see the allocation kind of grow, kind of very deep. And so now this year, we have almost close to fifty percent of the submission proposals submitted are have AI component. And I would say majority of them are kind of having the large language model component yet and beyond traditional deep learning application. And of course to consider the need of the storage for AI. I think two things. On the capacity side, you just see the amount of data set, right? The largest one on the top is beyond 100 terabyte of data set. And 100 terabyte is a kind of like a before. Capacity we give out to the project 100 terabyte. Smaller project only get 10 terabytes of capacity allocation in our storage system. And so we consider 100 terabyte. More than 100 terabyte is a kind of large storage. Space. And not only that, also the checkpointing requires a lot of storage space.

And actually, I was doing this MLPerf storage submission, and I was running the 1T model checkpointing, and then it kept failing because later on. I realized that it was because the project that I got allocated doesn't have enough capacity. I was only like 100 terabyte of the space, but this one checkpointing is 18 terabytes. So if I run that 10 checkpointing already beyond 100 terabyte, right? Then I realized, wow, even myself didn't get the change of the mindset. Storage, even the capacity of the AI need is really growing. Traditional scientific simulation doesn't need like 100 terabytes of data for a single workload. But AI does need. And also, throughout the year, I learned that this AI have new kinds of I/O patterns. If you consider the HPC workload, they are typically right-intensive, like molecular dynamic simulations, climate modeling, you have huge. Amount of checkpointing data, and it's primarily right. The read only happens when you read the input or when you want to restart the calculations, right? And also, it's bulk parallel using MPIO or HDL5 library building. And the data is multi-dimensional array, which is very simple and trivial in a sense. And it's single-threaded, synchronous I/O. And even though our storage system, our system, HPC system were equipped with. uh non-local storage. Uh we very rarely see HPC workload using those uh non-local storage. Uh because the HPC people uh workload people they don't want to deal with this uh moving the data on their own and then it's just not really useful. Uh we do see one or two workload using that.

But not as frequently being used as AI workload. And now you can see the AI workload, especially in the beginning of the deep learning transformation, is really, really intensive. You need to read a huge amount of data, and then you have a lot of small and sparse IO methodologies. data intensive um and and and also uh the data format is kind of uh very uh variety formats like JSON, text, uh, key value um format and then it's also multi-threaded, asynchronous I.O. This is kind of one of the important features of the Python workloads. And then storage hierarchy becomes more and more important. And you will also see something later on in my slides. And also, this kind of huge pipeline includes different kinds of stages, including data preparations. query processing, data loading, checkpointing, even inferencing, they have kind of different IO need. Not like traditional HPC, you just meet the need of the checkpointing, then it's okay. But then for the AI, different stages have different requirements. So and and then I think in 2017, I take some time to scan through all the popular uh AI workloads in commercial AI workload and also in the scientific uh um domains, uh particularly 3D United MeetNet is uh in a is kind of too uh popular. The ML training, ML Perf training workload, and Cosmoflow and DeepCam are in the ML Perf HPC are coming from the lab, FFM, and then later on the large language training. And this is the kind of overall view about the domains and the The sample size, you can see it ranges from 100 kilobytes to like 100 megabytes.

And it's stored in different kinds of format. And the total size of the data set also ranges quite a lot. And in terms of the IO stress pattern, some are kind of metadata in terms of. Some are kind of bandwidth, bonded, and some include random reads, et cetera. So it's huge kind of in a landscape. And basically, I think we need a search benchmark. We need a benchmark to really understand the access pattern of AI workloads. And easy for us to identify the bottleneck and propose optimization. Running the full workload is just kind of too tedious and too complex. But we need a simple benchmark, allow us to simulate different kind of Set up, and then we can inform the researchers or practitioners the best storage solution, and also guide the storage and AI software and hardware co-design. So, hardware needs to improve, and many times it was the poor kind of design of the software. Can give a lot of pain to the hardware. So it's really a co-design process. And benchmark, I think in this community, probably FOIO is familiar to everybody here. It is a very good tool on the single node level. In HPC domain, we have the IOR. Which is kind of simulating the checkpointing with different kind of block size, IO patterns, and in the HPC domain. And when we consider do we need to develop a new benchmark suite for AI, and the answer. Is yes, because these are kind of focused more on the HPC or traditional workload. It doesn't have the multi-threaded, doesn't have the synchronous I/O, and then also it's too low-level, too low-level.

We need kind of a benchmark which kind of familiar to the AI. Practitioners which can be configured at higher level, and you will see later on. And this, we start to design this DRIO benchmark. And if we consider this the whole kind of pipelining of the AI training, include the data preparedness. And then store in the storage system, loaded into the CPU host, and then transferred to the GPU for training. Of course, during those times, when we start to consider this a benchmark, GPU-initiated I/O requests are still not so popular yet. Majority, I mean, GPU directs. Storage was there, but we found that people don't want to use GPU direct for two reasons. One is that loading the data to GPU, then you didn't have the overlap of the I/O with the compute, right? Because the GPU needs to wait for the data to be loaded to GPU. Is that in a lot of training, it involves the pre-processing of the data, right? And that part is compute. And if we load it to the host, then the host can participate in this compute. And that part of compute can also be overlapped with the compute in the In the GPU. So that's why kind of not too many people think about using the GPU direct. But now, later on, more and more, kind of people start to think about the GPU-initiated IO request. And now, and so they. Then we figure out, okay, if I want to have this kind of DIO, how about I just maintain everything but just take away the compute or replace the compute with a sleeve slavement. I maintain the same kind of data loader so that it looks like an AI kind of software.

But all the compute is replaced by the sleep statement with the same amount of time. And with this, we get the advantage of we don't need this actual accelerator to run the benchmark. And this is a huge, huge win because many stories. Doesn't want to kind of set up a GPU system to run our benchmark. We just need a bunch of CPU hosts and then connect it to a storage system, and then you can run a benchmark. So I think that's probably one of the major reasons this EU. Easier for the storage vendor to submit the result. And second thing, as I mentioned, we use the framework data loader. The real workload use PyTorch data loader, we also use PyTorch data loader, transport data loader, and all the configuration there is the same. Number of workers. And prefetching, etc. Everything is the same. And then we also find out we need to support data generation. And in a way that people doesn't have to download the huge amount of data set from web from the internet and then do the benchmark. We generate the data. As long as we configure like What is the sample size? How would you want to kind of store the data set? How many sample profiles, et cetera, all those configurations. And then we want to make it configurable to different workloads. We want to have a single core, but just by tuning different parameters. That you can simulate different AI workloads. You can simulate the LOM checkpointing, you can simulate the UNET 3D or Cosmo Flow without the change of the code. Just do the configuration. And so we have this modular design.

And we configure the workload through a YAML configuration file. And then we have the benchmark runner. Benchmark runner also calls the read for reading the data and then write for doing the checkpointing. And this can be connected to different kinds of storage. You just need to add a layer. It can connect to S. or positive file system. And then we have the data generation module also. And then the other important thing is we need a holistic performance monitoring and tracing across all software stack. So, the important thing to me for the benchmarking is that we need to know all the detail, like different levels, whether it performs well or not, so that we can know if there's a poor performance, whether it's due to the software or due to the storage system, right? That we can know how to optimize. And then this is an example of the configuration file. And you can see, if you are the AI practitioner, you know that the YAML file is really looks like the real workload, right? We have the model setup, just tell the System, what's the size of the model, which framework is using, and have you doing training or data generation? And in terms of the data set, where do you want to put the data, which format, number of samples, etc. And then in the reader, we also set number of worker batch size. Which data load are you using, those kind of things, right? And then how many people you want to run a benchmark. So it looks like outwardly just like running a real AI workload, right? Except that the computational time now is assimilated as a sleep event. We just doing nothing.

Waiting for the data to be ready. And then this is a checkpointing workload. We also can define the number of layers, number of K V has, what kind of parallelism we are doing, pipeline parallelism, data parallelism, et cetera, and how many checkpointing do you want to write. And now, I will start with give you some confidence that this benchmark tool actually generates the similar I/O pattern of the real workload. So, I compare with the Unit 3D, and I will mention a little bit more about this. This is the tool that I mentioned for the monitoring or providing and tracing. I will mention more later on. And you compare with the real workload and the DRIO workload. So here you can see this is a multiple worker doing the IO loading. The main thread is the first row. Doing compute. In the PLIO, it's doing kind of sleep. And the IO threads are doing loading the data. And you compare the pattern. It's essentially the same, right? And you also see that, okay, in the beginning, they are prefetching. So in the prefetching, Stage, almost every worker reaches out to the storage system, right? So prefetching is a very intensive period of phase. And that's why in your AI training, the first time step takes much longer, right? For two reasons. One is if you have a GPU, initialization of the GPU training is longer, but a lot of time also. This multiple thread accessing the storage system takes it longer. And then later on, you can also see that it's loading data whenever one batch of data gets consumed, it will try to load new data.

And if I do Schematically, basically, the main thread is doing training, the I/O thread is doing the data loading. And if the data loading is not fast enough, there will be a store in the IDO in the compute time, right? So we define the metrics basically as the accelerator utilization. If your IOS is a I/O is very fast because it can be doing things under the hood. Then your GPU is always busy. You get a 100% utilization. If the I/O is slow, then constantly GPU has to wait for the storage system to feed the data, then accelerator utilize. Will be very low. We also have another throughput, just number sample per second, right? See how fast you can load the data. And so this is the overall benchmark matrix we use in the MLPO storage benchmarking effort. Now I want to say A little bit more on the IO profiling and tracing for AI. So, this is for monitoring the IO performance. I don't know, for those who know the Chinese, you can read that. Basically, it's like in Chinese, all the doctors try to understand the whole thing, right? Maybe the Western way, if you get a pain in your finger, you try to fix your finger, but in China, it would link the symptom to the actual problem inside, right? To have a full diagnosis. And this is the tracing tool. Eventually, we know that there are a lot of existing. Tools like Dacian profiler recorder and some kind of Linux system use IOProf, but they are kind of just profile the IO level, right? You get a lot of trace of the IOSS pattern, but this is not link back. to the actual application.

And so we need a provider with very easy to use, just plug in, set the environment variable, and then generate a choice result and visualize it. Second, it works with Python application. I find that all this provider doesn't work well with Python. It only provides a trace for the main thread. But Python has a lot of background thread doing the I.O. And I found out that none of those in the beginning, right now they all improve, try to kind of adopt the AI workload. When the first time I use this, none of those generate a trace for the Python workload. And then also, we want to profile at different levels. Once you see the trace, you will see what do I mean by different level. And easy to integrate with other tools. Of course, it should also have a very small overhead. And you can check the paper. And so there's a whole tool. called DF tracer and this is uh built in into the DRIO core also. And this is the the tool eventually how to use is that we have uh um just import the library and then decorate the specific function, uh particularly because we are interested in the in the data loader. So I will decorate a pre-processing part, read a data part, and get item part. And this below is the trace that I got. And you can see that it contains all the level. The main thread is doing the training. And then during the training, it also contains the compute, host-to-device transfer. Then you can see the get item is where each sample is loaded. And then going to the get item, you see it's doing the positive read.

So now this positive read is actually linked back to the Python get item code. And this is very useful as you. Will see later on. And there's also providing information seeing that which calls how expensive they are. And the first thing I found out is that because we have this holistic view, the first thing I tried before is I just compared the Petroch and TensorFlow. And I was. Using HDL5 format. And I immediately found out that interesting PyTorch, you can have different workers loading the HDL5 file, whereas TensorFlow, you cannot, because of the thread locking thread safety. So you can see all the It cannot do multiple read concurrently, but PyTorch can. So that's why PyTorch with HTTP work well, because PyTorch created workers with processes, but TensorFlow is with thread. Kind of information can be easily seen with this idea of tracer. And so, those, this, whatever I mentioned, is the tool side, right? And the ML Pro Storage Working Group is to kind of define what are the workloads that We want to focus on. And then, what are the rules for the submissions and etc.? So, the things listed here is the roundup submission we just finished. We have three roundup submissions already, and this 2.0 is the most recent one. And the result was released in August. And we have three training workloads: Unite 3D or 3D Unite, Res950, and CosmoFlow. And we are gradually incorporating new other kind of more recent workloads. And we also added the checkpointing workload. And specifically, I think if you attended West.

talk earlier, we have the uh from the smaller one, uh AB all the way to one trillion parameters. Um and uh this is a a summary from the early time we have the uh we zero point five, we have uh five organizations. submitted the result. But now you can see we have twenty-six organizations uh submitted the result. It grows quite a lot, right? I think David Condor is in the back. He can say that this is the number one kind of in terms of the uh number of submitters, right? Uh almost. Almost. So kind of And David from one of the founders of ML Founder and ML Burke. And so the ML Burke Storage Working Group set a record of the number of submitters, but unfortunately you guys were beat just last week by ML Burke Inference by one. So what that means though is we have a complexity. So you're benchmarking the benchmarkers. So if you're here and you are interested in any current performance, you could get involved in it for a story so that they can retake the crown for their own. So make sure all of you get signed off to the working group and participate. The submission also. And then, if you want to know a little bit more detail, what are the different kinds of storage types that make the submission, you can check the link for more detail. And so, it's a wonderful thing to me to have a community effort because we. We want to kind of really explore the whole landscape.

We want to explore different kinds of storage solutions, IBM, Spectrum, Laster, Dails, or Cloud Storage, or a lot of kind of new NVMe drive, and different kinds of storage solutions, and see how it performs for different types. Of workload, right? And this can only be done with a community effort. At Argon, we only have lost the ends. And I can only know to a sub-area of the landscape. But with all of us participating, we can get the whole picture. And also, in terms of the software. We have data loader, we can use a lot of data loader, and many kind of other technology, even data format, will play an important role here. So it's a wonderful thing that we can all participate so that we can get a kind of better understanding. Understanding of this AI thing. Now, I would like to go a little bit more on the technical details, the lessons learned from these ML Pro Sorry submissions. And I will start with the United 3D workload. And this is the pattern. And so when I try to kind of find out the best configuration for a best setup for a for the IO best IO I usually start with the number worker one so that I can get all the compute and and I o ratio right in Unite 3D it's a IO intensive workload you have like one hundred to one hundred fifty kind of megabyte uh per sample and this is a kind of big on the big range. And so you can see here the compute part, which is the um the here. Here is the compute. And this is the uh loading one batch of the data, which contains seven Sample.

And because of the, and this is a tested with the NVMe drive, and you can see because of the I/O is not fast enough, the GPU was idle here. And so the IO is more costly compared to compute, it's 1.3. But the good thing is that we can always spawn. Thread to do the IO. And because it's 1.3, we can know if I increase the number of workers to 2, I should be able to cover the cost, right? So then increase to 2, you can see all the idle time was away, right? So now we can meet the need and the AU, I mean. Immediately increased close to 100%. And going a little bit closer, I also find out that even though I'm reading one MPZ sample, but surprisingly, under the who it decomposed to about A bunch of uh POSIC core, and each of the POSIC core is 256 kilobytes. And which I immediately figured out that probably not good kind of performance. So I just switched to HDFI. I know that HDF5, when you read the data, it will read the whole thing. So the transfer size will be like the size of the file. Instead of loading that by small chunks, it will load in the entire file. And and because of that, immediately we found out even with number of worker equal to one, you compare with HTTP and VMPZ, HTTP5 is faster, right? So I only need one One thread to do the I/O now. I don't need two threads. So I increase the I/O. This is the same data by just storing a different format. So you can see that this is not too much of the storage performance, but it's actually the software part, how you organize the data. And of course, previously it was with A100, but now with H100, the compute is much faster.

So it's two times faster. And what we did is just increase the number of workers, right? Still conveniently. So with MPZ, we use the number of worker equal to 4, but H25. I think this should be true. We can still meet the need. And now earlier it was doing things with the MVME. Now I also try with the Laster. And now we find the similar story, but now the Laster, the chunk size. is actually 4 megabyte. Previously it's 256 kilobyte. I haven't kind of checked in detail how the MP Lumpy array data loading library deals with different type of systems and make that difference. But it's kind of interesting thing to know that different Storage will impact how the software loads the data. And important thing I know also when I was playing with the ML Pro for storage submission add on system is that if we increase the number of GPU on one node, the um the bandwidth need increase linearly. So in particular for fast accelerator, if I do like A, I need twenty-three of a gigabyte per second of data to feed to meet the need of A. Right. So this you will find out that if you are doing a local drive, you have to use probably multiple NVME and then have multiple PCIE link to be able to feed that uh amount of uh kind of data fast enough to support the need of the A. Right. If you are doing remote, Then, probably the NIC, the NIC is important, number of NIC is important, right? So, when I was testing an Argon system, I figured out that the system that I tested doesn't provide enough kind of NIC, number of NIC. The NIC becomes a bottleneck for me to transfer the data inside the computer.

Another thing, as I Mentioned, you see that Lumpy array and HDL5 has different kinds of overheads, right? So even though you may track your MVMB, theoretically, you may be able to provide 10 gigabytes per second, but when you load that with the Lumpy array, you probably cannot get 10 gigabytes per second because of the Software overhead. So that also needs to be considered. And besides that, when you scale out, you'll find out that actually it can also be bound by the overall kind of peak bandwidth of the parallel file system. In this case, I was testing a lot. File system, which the peak bandwidth is 650 gigabytes per second. And as you can see, as I scale the number of nodes, it was bounded. But if I place the data to NVMe local drive, I can keep scaling linearly. So that's an important thing to know. Also, NVMe is still important. Important in bringing the data close to compute. And these are the kind of similar analysis to other two workloads, which are a little bit less I/O-intensive. I'll just skip the main result. ResNet 50 also, probably you all kind of now know that. Many, many small files don't perform well. We learned that in the last file system, when people are doing with millions of files, always cause the last file system down or kind of get stoked. Even you cannot do an LS command quickly. And not only that, you also find out that. Actually, if you saw the file as a PNG file, the actual IO code, there's a lot of software overhead of loading that image. The actual POSI code is just a small fraction of the overall get item.

And then with the PF record, It solves this, not just reducing the number of files, but even the software overhead is reducing. Then I quickly go through, besides the training, traditional training workload, we also have large language models. And in large language models, the entire pipeline Is that we download the data pre-processing? In this particular case, pre-processing involves mostly like a tokenization. Besides the deduplication, it's such a tokenization. And once we tokenize the data, we store the tokens in a binary file. And this is what MapchanDCB is doing. And then we memory map. Of the binary file and provide it to the data loader and do the training. And then we store the data back. And it's important to know that what are the needs of the different stages of this pipelining. I'll quickly go through. First is on the tokenization side. Tokenization, which is Load the raw data and then tokenize it and then store it back to the binary file. And you can see the same trace file tells us that the report is very minimal over here. Majority of the thing is in the compute. And then sometimes once in a while, you need to read a kind of four megabyte of buffer to the binary index file. And we also know that it's roughly like two megabyte per second per thread. So in a single node, if you have like 32 um CPU code, you can get about um like 50, 60 megabyte per second, right? So, because majority of the time you are spending on compute. That means actually, I don't need to actually download all the data. I can do streaming.

I can do streaming, and while I'm streaming the data, I do the tokenization. I can eliminate the need of the storage for storing all those raw data. The other thing. I mean, many people say that, okay, this read part is not kind of a small overhead. The training part loading the data is very cheap, right? And we use the profiler, we can actually see that. And it's loading that one batch, mini batch. Of data is in a millisecond range, whereas the training step is like in the 10-second or one-minute range. So, this is not IO-intensive. So, majority of the interesting part is on the checkpointing for the large language model. In checkpointing, People use sharding because of the different parallelism, right? And particularly related to the checkpointing data, it matters a lot whether we are doing pipeline parallelism or doing 0.3. So the first case, Is that in writing the trackpoint in data? There are two types of, primarily two types of data. One is the model part, the other is the optimizer part. And optimizer contains maybe more than 80% of the data is optimizer data. And so in the first scenario where we have powerism and we use 0, 0, 1, the optimizer is shrouded across all the GPU, but the model is shrouded only within the data parallel instance. That means that they are redundant across the different data parallel instance. So then when you write a checkpointing, basically the optimizer part is every rank write their own kind of data that belong to it. But the model part, only a part the first data parallel instance will write that the model.

And that's import that's the entire model, right? Um whereas when you do z zero three and this is we shut it everything. We shut it a model and shut it optimizer. And typically For smaller models, we use 0.3. For bigger model, like 4,5B, we do 0.1. And this also has an impact on the scaling performance. The plot show here: as I was doing testing, well, I'm submitting the 2.0 storage benchmark submission. I do a scaling test on Dell's file system. At that time, we have about 200 server. And then you can see different model size on the 1T model. Eventually, I was able to write the entire like 18 terabytes of data within less than five seconds. And the bandwidth that I achieved close to three terabytes per second. And also for other stories, other models, as I scale, you can see the bandwidth is also increasing. But then there are some kind of panels. Here. The penalty is because of the two reasons that I mentioned. In the let me just quickly go through this. This is the actual I/O pattern for the checkpointing. We want to see, like, in the chat pointing, how much data we actually write it out. In terms of the transfer size. So you can see the model part is, because it's smaller and it gets shotted, this is with 0.3. You can see that the transfer size is pretty small. And if I increase more data power instance, this will become smaller and smaller and eventually become a bottleneck. The optimizer, those are big chunks of data, like four gigabytes. If you continue to scale data power instances, this will continue to scale. And this is what we found here.

If I scale to large scale, the optimizer part nearly decreases. But then the model part eventually becomes a bottleneck, cannot scale. Anymore. But eventually, of course, in this case, I still kind of can write the whole data track pointing less than one second. Another thing for the bigger model, one trillion, as I mentioned, only the first data parallel instances write the model part. Pointing the optimizer part, everybody is writing it. And eventually, you can see because of that, it also becomes dominant at large scale. Because of the motor part, just that same number of GPUs writing that data, and it takes the same amount of time. But the optimizer part will keep decreasing. So that's what we learned, right? And now, kind of in terms of the order of magnitude, we can all finish all this track pointing in less than 10 seconds. And usually, training, when Argon kind of, after the acceptance, people start to use our system. In the beginning, when we are testing, the system was not stable. So almost like every 15 to 30 minutes, we have a node failure, like pin failure. So we really need fast checkpointing. And it's good that, at least for the AI model training, we can finish this in less than 10 seconds. Model checkpointing, right? So it can provide all the needs. And this is a future roadmap of the ML Post Storage Benchmarking Group. We want to incorporate new workloads, including the graph neural network, and other kinds of models that potentially have interesting IP.

Pattern and KV cache now become more and more popular and important, and vector database, and then now also the GPU initialized data loading. And because we see more and more, if we need a lot of kind of bandwidth to Drive the data loading from the storage to the GPU. Sometimes the host is not powerful enough to make that data movement. We need the GPU to spawn more thread to drive the data movement. A takeaway that AI really changed the storage. It's no longer just purely focused on the bandwidth, but we have to look at the whole things. The asset patterns are different, and then the whole software stack will impact the overall throughput things. And benchmark is important. With this benchmark tool, we can quickly identify the bottleneck. And then do play with different kinds of setup and now feedback to the actual application. And also, we can find out now, for example, the NumPyArray is not good, and we can inform back to the AI community. You know, either you need to improve the NumPyArray library or switch to other. Library. And it's nice that we can have a community to work together to explore all these things together. With that, I just would like to thank the support from Nalgam and all the people who participate in developing the benchmark and define. All the rules for the submission, et cetera, including the people at Argon and the M of Storage Working Group. Okay, and I can take some questions. We are working on that. Yeah. The RAG part is the vector database. We are working on that. We have a working sub-working group.

So if you are interested, join the main working group and then we will assign you to the sub-working. Working group to work develop that. Any other questions? Thank you very much. And you can talk to me.
