SNIA SDC 2025 - Assessing AI Storage Communication Performance at Scale

Good morning everyone. Let's get started. People will come in as we go. My name is Venkat Pulela. I'm CTO at networking at Keysight. My partner in Prime. Cliff went very long, the travel, so he could make it today. So, I will do the presentation for both of us. So, we're going to talk the closest cousin to storage, which is networking. AI is a system design problem, and then we cannot. talk about one area without others, right? The whole thing gets pulled in. So let's get started. Okay. Okay. About the AI infrastructure and how it is scaling in multiple directions. Where is the data? Where is the storage? How does it move? If not, anything, if there is one takeaway, networking, if you don't look at properly, there will be choke points. And that will affect storage. And instead of everyone blaming the internet is slow, network is down, it'll be storage turn. And then we'll point the finger at each other. So that's about to come. So we're going to talk about that. And a little bit about AI and And you know why AI is different and how it affects and how we want to abstract and test and validate it, different levels of abstraction. So those are the areas we'll cover today. So this is about terminology. AI is scaling everywhere. Folks are working on scaling it in every dimension. The scale in part of it is coming in within, you know, how do you do things within the chip, on the board, chiplets, there are multiple architectures, wafer scale, so there is one dimension of scaling happening there. And another dimension is how do we. We used to build boxes, right? A unit.

used to be a chassis. Since then we have moved from there to a rack is the unit for AI, right? Everything is optimized at that rack. So how do we connect things within the rack? And any large system ends up being large means you know large at the next level. Of scale, you know, always ends up being highly optimized synchronized systems, and you connect them little loosely and into a bigger distributed system. That's the simplest way of scaling anything, right? So, the scale up, part of it is trying to scale this first unit. How do we optimize things in the rack and load store semantics, highly synchronous system, and how far can we push that, right, while density is growing? Scale out is the traditional distributed system. You know, how far can I go? The couple of things that are emerging are due to power, due to you know availability of different uh you know either space or other constraints, uh things are moving across data centers. Uh when m things move across data centers, do you want to extend the same abstraction across data centers? It becomes a little harder. Think of R D M A across You know, hundreds of miles, and what does that bring, and whatnot. But there's a lot of work happening there, and that's clearly emerging. And I think Nvidia recently called it scale across, which is kind of scale up at the next level, became scale across. So new areas are emerging in that. And last week, I was talking to my friend Surendra. Anubolu from Broadcom, and he started seeing something scale into NTN, into space, scale abroad, scale, something else.

So there are more scales coming, people are really optimizing things at different levels, right? So that's the terminology. So, with all that kind of huge AI infrastructure that spans all over the place, Where is the data? So, a good amount of data is applications are running in the cloud, so they're gathering all the data. So, your AWS has your data, and then your remote data centers have the data, and your edge locations have the data. It could be your atomic. Car, it could be, you know, it could be your branch office, it could be various things, right? And you also have some local data. So you have data spread around that. And then where is our storage? Storage is also kind of moving around. People are optimizing based on where AI is. Putting pressure on so-called cloud, what we call front-end, was the back end. Your browser was the front end. The terminology is changing. So your cloud network became your front end. And then just that the GPUs cannot use those 100 gig links or even. actually 100 gig is pretty fast. We had forty and ten and uh that's earlier, right? Just to connect uh the GPUs. Uh there is a separate back-end network coming up. And then things that you want to quickly back up from GPUs, you know, you could directly connect storage there. That's one area that uh a lot of work is happening. And even how the AI storage is connected to the front end. Typically, these servers have multiple links, and there was a nice paper, not like a presentation by Meta a couple of weeks ago at scale on how they are using all the four links and things like that.

may look like common sense, it is just that the bottlenecks are moving and people are trying to solve incrementally. So how these AI tracks and their connectivity to front end is also you know there's a lot of innovation happening there also. So there is some you know all your storage is there and of course you have something in the cloud. Once we know where the data is and you are storing, how is this data moving and where is the network role and where are the choke points? That is the whole point of this discussion. So, before you do anything else, you want to gather all your data and you enjoy. The data. This is the third day of the summit, so you have seen this said in n number of ways. You're hearing one more time from a networking point of view. Bear with me. So you are ingesting the data, so where are you getting the data from? And like we said, you're bringing it from the cloud, and then you have various choices. Of where you keep all that into your tier 1 storage within your data center, basically. And there is, of course, with so much data moving, there is definitely a tier 1 and tier 2. There is a cold and hot. You know, tears, you guys are experts at it, so I'm not going to preach that aspect of it. And it still, when I talk to folks, right, at least in my role, luckily, I get to talk to lots of folks, get different views. What I hear is that even the cold tears are distributed, which adds additional complexity in model. Modeling all this stuff, and I won't use the word benchmarking.

I will say when you are trying to optimize, if your tier 2 is not local, if your tier 2, you know, your cold tier is remote, it adds its own implications. And then when you are modeling, you really have to figure out all these radio. Of you know how effective is your cache and you know cold versus hot ratio. So some of that. So even though it's shown as it's all local, some of these things seem to be fully distributed. Some people are going through that. So just a little bit of animation. uh on how what is happening you in your public cloud or in in your cloud, you have a bunch of uh they they they have their own set of protocols. How do you model them? Uh h how do you simulate, emulate uh those protocols, uh as well as how do you move the data. And model it, right? And then that is what comes into your data center. So you would want to have something produce realistic traffic patterns, realistic storage access patterns on both sides. And so that is where the modeling is. To do something, you know, there are agents that you can put in your cloud that could mimic the real patterns that you are going to expect. The reason for putting an agent versus why don't you do something real? Absolutely, you can always use anything real is always good. But in most of these cases, you would want some. That is consistent and repeatable. So that forces an agentic, I would say agentic, agent is already loaded. So forget that, you know, forget the agentic. But having an agent which kind of reproduces as much faithfully. As possible, these access patterns is going to be very useful.

And there are a whole bunch of use cases in terms of once you are moving all this data, what are you going to test? There are variations that are happening, either time-based or because of some other adverse serial workloads when you are ingesting like. Lot of data, once in a while you see a glitch. How do you identify that? So, and is there a deterioration of things happening over a period of time? There could be a security access control list somebody put in that is reducing performance of something at the system level, encryption, decryption, you know, there are various other. Things that will so you may want to keep monitoring the level of bandwidth and the level of you know performance that you are getting from all these storage and the data movement, right? The next stage of the whole AI pipeline is pre-processing. Lot of this is in a way, I'm not going to define the pre-processing here, but a lot of east-west. Traffic happening within the data center, the servers are talking to other servers and doing a lot of processing. And then, how do you make sure that you have enough bandwidth, your latencies are okay? And the whole idea is that where is the bottleneck when you look at end-to-end? So, you would want to model each of these stages with appropriate. Uh you know, data patterns, uh access patterns, uh uh network traffic and multi-tenancy adversarial workloads and you know security and whatnot, right? So that's where the problem is.

Uh but uh but once you kind of ingest all that now I wouldn't say ingest, you kind of get all the data the data center, there's a quite a bit of modeling you need to do to make sure that your pre-processing uh is modeled properly. So that's the next stage. And before we really get on to the training part of it, because GPUs don't work on your uh text it they work on your uh you know tensors uh so they There is a process in terms of how do you convert your text, your context, and we talked about all the KV cache, I'm not going to go into that. And then before it goes into the training and into your GPU memories for them to consume. So all these data transformations and how would that evolve? And what are the implications for either uh in network compute as well as you know storage and compute coming together, right? That is in network compute is making a little bit of progress. Uh while we have compute or FPGS next to storage, there was some discussion yesterday. Uh that area is not well explored. Wasn't explored enough, but I think going forward there will be quite a bit of innovation there. There's a lot of possibilities there because the number of transformations that we see are too many, because native data, native formats will reduce those. And in my view, more than doing computer. Next to you, where your data is, the data transformation is the first use case. The reason for that is the compute. The funny thing about the AI problem is that you want all the data everywhere at the same time. So, for some reason, let's say I need all the data in the world.

I get everything, I do something with it, I have an insight or some kind of a summary. Maybe I just had all add, I just added all the numbers. The immediate next thing is I need to distribute it to every other place, right? So in that sense, you know, doing the putting compute next to your storage, compute compute, right? Is a difficult use case because you bring everything you compute suddenly, you need the compute in the other location. And the data is needed in the other location. So, when you naturally think what is the compute that is next to your storage is going to do, what's the best use case, is the data transformation. That way, I speak my language, you speak your language, but you know, loosely describing that way. And then, you know, those transformations are the first order of compute we need. To think in terms of storage, right? And how do you model that? And the reason I'm getting into some of these ideas is because more than debugging, optimization is where a lot of this modeling is very useful right now, right? Debugging at the system scale is very difficult. I was talking to somebody at NVIDIA, they're building these massive systems, even they have the chance. Challenge of getting GPUs and they have the challenges of debugging these large systems. How do you do that? And maybe they are saying because they are building the large systems, right? So optimization is the view for now, and then we will get into the next level of debugging eventually. And once we get into the training, this is fairly understood. And I would say a lot of effort went into it.

This is GPUs talking to GPUs, all RDMA memory moving through, and a lot of network-related congestion control, load balancing, packet spraying, split packets into cells and distribute all those things. There's a lot of innovation. That happened recently. It's all getting into production. If you are following Ultra Ethernet or UA Link or scale-up Ethernet, you will see all that. But so, this is the good news. But this is where the bottlenecks right now will shift from: oh, your net. Network is the problem, today storage is the problem, right? So, some of you are going to get these calls that your networking cousins are getting right now. Again, that's my guess. So, this is well understood part of it. I'm not going to go through the whole thing. Jumping onto the inference, you heard enough KV cache, I won't discuss. But couple of things happening there is uh definitely uh specialized GPUs or accelerators for each stage uh that changes the modeling part uh one more time, right. Uh uh last week at AI uh Infra Summit, The pre-fill stage versus decode stage GPUs are different, and you know how they are how they are different, and you know, so they are being designed separately. So, that again, there the message. Sizes and the implication for the network: how do you move the KV cache, like you know, the previous presentation? So, that's going to change the patterns. One piece of work that is happening that is relevant in this discussion is at ML Commons, there is a discussion about describe. A system of systems. How do you describe your memory within a system, right?

Within a box, right? Where is your memory? Where is your PCIe bus? Where is your CPU, GPU? How are they connected? How do you describe that in a consistent way? Because that has implications in terms of when you run an application, where are the bottlenecks? If the PC, if you receive a lot of data, you are unable to digest the data, then you will push back some kind of flow control back onto your network. How does it impact? For that, to be able to model all that, you need to describe the system. And then you need to describe the topology so that you can describe the whole system. System, right? So, there is some work happening there. The value of all that work is to be able to model and debug and optimize this AI system. So, that is going to change when on the inference side also As this KV cache algorithms and how that's being used is evolving. So, how is A unique? Couple of A is unique in terms of somebody who does either performance or a quality testing validation of these things. Couple of things. Earlier, if you were testing something, you could test your component. Let's say none of us build the whole thing. I build a piece of memory, somebody builds a router, somebody builds a NIC card, right? Earlier, the whole notion was that I can do my testing of that unit or that component or that module and be happy, and I throw it over the wall. Somebody else takes few of these components, assemble them into bigger components, and somebody who actually builds the system used to do a system test later, right? And that was fine.

But what is unique about AI is that I'm not saying that the typical unit quality should. Have gone away or testing is not needed, but the real bigger problems are appearing only at certain scale. So that means you need to do larger and larger scale testing and system testing, system testing earlier and earlier, right? So things work fine at a lower scale. But not at a higher scale, right? If you are designing a a packet processing pipeline, the statistical distribution of traffic gave you you know it didn't expose all the weaknesses of your design. Because you statistically, there are different packets coming in, accessing different aspects of your design, right? Whereas with AI, AI is almost like a single application on the whole network, right? And it does one thing, it just does it, you know, it moves the data at an X rate and whatnot. So if you have some issue in terms of Let's say packets come in and you distribute to six pipelines. What if there is only one flow? There is a huge so-called elephant flow is coming and all the data is hitting one pipeline, something gets exposed. And including packets, interpacket rates, and whatnot, AI is exposing a different set of problems, right? And that's forcing everyone to look. At system testing earlier and earlier. And system testing is the requirement. You cannot say I built a small thing, I have a storage, or I have a HPM, and I tested it, it's done. It basically has to be tested in the context. And the events and triggers of a system, of a larger system.

So that's, and this thing is happening all the way from pre-silicon to post-silicon to system testing, right? So you, when somebody is designing hyperscalers or designing an extra AI accelerator, they are looking at how do I test this chip as part of a system. Earlier, we To run a few vectors and your design verification, you are happy. So, this is definitely something unique on the AI side. So, this is forcing us to look at how you do testing at all layers, right? That means even if you have a simple Verilog of a small component, can I really run? AI application on it and see what happens. And that too, can I do it at a scale? Typical packet-level testing and transport and other things already exist. It's a well-known science. So I'm not going to delve into that. But maybe we will get a little bit. Into what is happening at a higher layers. If you look at a traffic generator, let's say test network or storage earlier, they were almost like a packet blaster. So you can define certain packets and you can send lots. Of traffic and you know do performance testing. What is changing is that AI brings in a stateful nature of the whole traffic movement. You cannot send some data out unless you receive the previous data. Do some kind of all reduce on it, right? Reduce operation. That means there is dependencies between the traffic and you know between all these individual operations. So there is no way of defining something and just repeating it or blasting it. So suddenly everything is stateful. Right now, right? And so the first round of testing is stateful, R DMA.

RDMA itself, you know, state, you know, in the past you could just create n number of RDMA frames and just blast and see what happens. But now you really need to maintain a number of states, a number of states. Of Q pairs and the scale, then you have really one million node network if we are getting there soon, I hear. Or even if you have a thousand node GPU system, how many Q pairs do you need, and how many flows are you going to track when you do all to all? So, those that scale of that state is a challenge, right? So the packet blasters are being upgraded to state, you know, maintaining state and you need to have these small state machines. You can't do full-fledged protocol state machines, but they are sometimes optimized to increase the density. There's a lot of work there, and you know, you have to model the transport before. If you really want to identify the choke points and congestions, and how if there is a congestion, how a congestion tree gets built, right? If there is a congestion, it spreads, right? And how does it spread, and how do you mitigate? You want to do all that modeling, you would have to do testing. At state full RDMA and transport level, right? So there is a lot of work happening here. If you go one level higher, like we said, everyone wants, I mean, if you are selling to hyperscalers, if you are not doing a full system testing on a component, I presume they won't take what you have. What you have been doing is not acceptable.

Anymore, that means the next after the transport you really have to test things at least at a cluster level and a collective communication level, right? There are a bunch of simulators, emulators that can come in and do two things for you, right? Let's say you have a server with sixteen GPUs. You can put an emulator next to it that makes it look like a 64 GPU cluster. One dimension is the scale, right? Your customers want you to test at next scale, and you don't have these 1000 GPUs with you, so you would have to put emulators around it to test, right? So, one aspect. Of it is scale. The second aspect is to run the collectives themselves. And when you are running these collectives because of the dependencies, and AI is a tail latency sensitive, it's not the million packets that went in properly, it is that one packet that is slow that decides the whole colour how fast the job completes and how fast the You know, the collective closes. So, to identify all that and how do you visualize, those are the bottlenecks that need to be understood and debugged. So, the next level of testing is after your RDMA, then you go and try to do the collective. And even if you have I mean there I heard yesterday somebody saying that they have a two thousand node system, still they find it difficult because you you have a real NVDA GPUs or you know and then you have two thousand nodes when something goes wrong, how do I test it.

One of the ways that is happening is that even though you have two thousand, You take a small portion of it out and put an emulator, right, which can really look into the much more details. It's a too small a font for you to look at at the bottom. But because you have as part of the collective bunch of nodes which can accurately record You know, things at a nanosecond level, identify which specific queue pairs or which specific systems might have an issue. That's how you can kind of introduce into your large system, but it's not, you can't do it for production. But in the labs, you can put in and then get into the detail and say, you know, how come one system is considered? Consistently somehow producing this last soldier to arrive, right? Or the slowest packet, somehow, one system. Maybe they have a power issue, maybe it's heating up for some reason, fan is. So, how do you look at secondary and tertiary failures, right? So, to find out those patterns, you can take a 2000-watt system, put A small emulator, get into the details. Because sometimes your Rails system is really good at doing your computation, doing the collective and doing the all-reduce and whatnot, but it may not tell you, like the resources are not allocated to look at every queue pair, record the time, starting, ending time stamps of every flow, every packet, every. everything, right. So, so that is you know that that's what happens when we say, hey, you know, do testing at a collective level.

But if you don't do that, you won't be able to identify that one node or one link or one whatever that's going to slow the whole thing down. So this becomes very important. The last one, but not the least, is application layer, right? Nothing like running your real applications there. So there is, you know, when you, and then there is certain things that happen in serial, certain things that are happening in parallel. How do we capture all these compute and communication tasks? Patterns and replicate it, right? Sometimes you cannot run your real applications on these emulators. So, the idea is: can we capture the data movements, the communication, and the compute patterns and replicate those patterns, right? So, there is a, in ML Commons, there is a group, Georgia Tech, Keysight, Meta, a whole bunch of folks there. It's all open discussion, by the way, right? It's all open forums, where an execution graph is of any A application can be captured. Just like I said, Infrastructure has a description that is being worked on at the lowest level. You have an application model also can be created. So you could really run one of your customers' applications and then capture the execution graph. I'm saying execution graph in a loose way, right? And be able to bring that pattern. Pattern and run it on in your lab, that becomes very important. And it should encompass storage, network, compute, all that. So there is work going on, you may want to take a look at that. The advantage of that is one is debug, because your customer doesn't want to share their data.

So maybe they will be fine. You know, it's being defined in such a way that Hopefully, as an industry, we can agree what gets captured without losing your confidential information. And once you do that, you could be changing your infrastructure models, a couple of models, and see which one works. Maybe this topology is better. That's some other topology. Just looking at some presentations at SICCOM. Happening, or already happened, I guess, in Spain, right? People are talking about already circuit switching, right? Going back from packet switching to circuit switching. How do you model those things and test it out? So, you can take real applications for debug, or you can take these, but idea is to capture the and then try different models of the. Infrastructure. And infrastructure could be in software, hardware, or firmware, or a cloud scale. So that the form factor is slightly different in this discussion. Form factor is another angle. But the idea is that you will be able to test at each of these levels what is happening with your data. Data movement, network, security, all that in one place. So there is some really good work happening there. Stepping back, I'm going to quickly summarize. So, if you are trying to validate your AI infrastructure, you're kind of validating your rack, you cannot take a simple storage. Angle, or you cannot take a network angle. It is how all of them are working together in tandem. And then, how do you test your bottlenecks in terms of when you are downloading all the data from your cloud back into your data centers?

You can model, there's a sequence. Of modelings that you need to do to kind of test your end-to-end and all the way to application benchmarking, which may not be quite relevant here, but typically when AI is being designed, I think most of the early mistakes are. Around security. People are building something and saying, hey, let me build a POC. That's our traditional intuition. Let me build something and see where it goes, and as I go, I will build. But security as an afterthought means completely you are throwing everything away and restarting. And we see it multiple places. A simple one-line change in an access. Control list can throw your, how do I say, there are tenery camps that apply these access control lists and some of them are algorithmic, that means they are not a memory based, you don't have like n number of lines, there they have some other logic which optimizes them. So, one line change could Cause a huge churn in the whole thing, and suddenly your performance is something. So, how do you identify those choke points at each of those components? And knowing that even a single component leads to one node becoming slow, and one node is slow, the whole thing is slow. So, this is kind of a unique challenge that we have, right. And so basically, you would want to kind of test this little bit of animation you can see, right?

You want to test how east-west traffic, and then where are the limits, where are the choke points, and then you want to test in parallel, you know, what is happening, data coming, you know, how is your Data ingestion pipeline happening, and how is your checkpointing happening, and right-size each of these models and test it at the same time, right? Validating AI is also about multiple applications, right? Good amount of infrastructure is moving, focus is moving from the data centers where you are doing training to inferencing. Uh in uh and then you know uh the the neo clouds, uh people with lots of GPUs setting up a uh a multi-tenant uh uh multi-company, multi-application uh infrastructure for doing inference. Uh and each of those applications have completely different uh Access pattern. So, how do you kind of test the challenges that you may face in that kind of situation in terms of performance transactions? So, there is a way of doing it. I'm trying to, I didn't get into the details of products and how do you do all this to avoid making it a marketing. Presentation, but you can consistently reproduce access uh consistently reproduce uh you know issues that you face by replacing your real applications with these agents that look like you can put an agent that can do NFS, but it does it slightly differently. It's not you are putting an agent because you would want it to perform exactly same way even though you repeat it thousand times, right? And that way, your cloud data when it moves to local storage, that path is tested without too many variations.

Otherwise, every iteration is so different That you couldn't identify what exactly is the problem. Whereas you want consistency. You can put agents in the cloud. You can put agents in your data center and test those paths as you evaluate. With that, I conclude this talk. Thank you very much. Any questions? Yeah, go ahead. Now you're coming from a networking perspective. Have you done any work with modeling how ultra ethernet works? Yeah, simple answer is I I'll repeat the question, have you done any modeling with ultra Ethernet, right? So uh yes, ultra Ethernet brings in uh bunch of things, right. Uh at i I mean of course it it it's it's creating l uh higher It's doing things at the link layer, which is link-level replay. So if there is a packet that is lost, instead of letting two ends of the world TCP stack realize and then retransmit, locally there is a retransmit. Even a credit-based flow control where you send only when the receiver is not received. Is happening at the link level, right? And at the transport level, you know, various other things. Simple answer is yes. The interesting part of it is you can just do the ultra-Ethernet testing. Ultra-Ethernet is a bunch of features, you could select a few and do testing. What would be more interesting is that now that you have ultra-Ethernet, what What is the implication to not only the back-end network, how does that affect storage side of things, right? So yeah, the you know and and then you know what does it mean to your checkpointing, what does it mean to your ingestion, and all those things. Yeah. Did I answer you?

So yes? The specifics in terms of, you know, yeah, we because every vendor uses the equipment to test their if the bugs they found, I cannot definitely comment on it. But people have hardware, that's the good news, right? We have recently tested. 1.6 terabits per second, which is really, you know, who thought 1.6 tera used to be the complete capacity of a switch. Now we are talking about links, right? I can't believe I'm even saying it, right? And the speeds and feeds are improving, and then AI is specific. Innovation is in production already. The other thing to say around that is that there is a proliferation of these solutions. So there is a lot of innovation happening at the transport layer. At the same time, there is also tremendous progress in terms of standardization at ultra-electric. Ethernet and UA link and things like that, right? So uh you still see a lot of proprietary uh R D MA protocols because you know people want to innovate, that's good. But also I see industry coming together and you know making sure that things are interoperating well. So uh maybe that's that would be the comment. Yeah. Yeah, go ahead. So are there any test suites available in ML, Common, or anywhere to test the networking aspects of the AI requirements? Uh uh question is uh are there any test suites to test uh AI requirements, right? Uh yes. Yeah, from a networking point of view. But the the whole notion is that you cannot just do networking, the networking test suites are evolving to system. That's the reason I'm a networking.

I just joined a SNIA yesterday, or at least I sent an email, I haven't quite joined, but right, thanks to Jay. And David McIntyre, he's not here, but you know, so we had a good discussion. So, the reason is that AI is a system, we cannot take a networking view. That will be one comment. The second is that, yes, there are systems available. So, what you could do, let's say you are building a server, or even you are building a component in a server, but you kind of, your demo is. is a server. You could really bring a box from you know avoided key side so far, but let's say we have a box, you can put it next to it, suddenly make it look like a you know 1000 BGP pairs is how it was in the past to do the network part. But now when AI comes in, it's not just the networking and routing testing you are doing that. Kind of assumed you do that anyway. What you need is this box to look like 63 other nodes so that you form a 64 node AI cluster and run tests at the link level, you test the RDMA, you slowly progress, right? First you make sure your links are okay, you know, one transceiver is bad or maybe one fiber is bad. Add things like that. And then, kind of, you go up and then you start doing a collective. You really run a collective communication. You do an all-raduous and see what happens. Some bottlenecks will come out. Maybe there is a server that heats up. Maybe there is a server, the PCIe, some issue on the PCIe that's not allowing whatever data it receives. To be loaded onto the memory. So, when it can't receive, it pushes back. There is a PFC, right?

There is a flow control messages that go onto the networking. It's not networking anymore, it's part of the whole AI. Now, what is the implication to your job completion time? The only metric is the job completion time in AI. Everything else is, you know, you figure out, right? So, there is no network, there is no storage. I would rephrase that as a how do I test whatever component I have at a system level, right? That is the question, answer is yes. So, the network testers have evolved to do transport testing as well as collective communications. Like I said, you could even capture an application. Bring back and replay and see how that works. You could be, if you are a network testing engineer somewhere in some company and you had your boxes and you had your network test suites and you were testing that, you are happy. Suddenly, your boss comes and says, Hey, make sure you do AI testing. How do you do that? So, those things are available where we We have these, you know, uh simulator simulators that will come in and then connect to your box and suddenly start doing AI centric testing, right? And AA has is bringing out unique problems which uh other uh you know you cannot just do you know your packet. Tests anymore, right, because at scale. So, that is one AI aspect. Second is the scale part of it. And the other requirement could be: yeah, you are testing it, but can you test it as if it is part of 64,000 GPUs, let us say? How do you do that?

The solution to that is you take some Real components, you surround them with some emulation, you surround them with some simulation. So, your system is 64,000 nodes, but you can't, nobody has a budget, even NVIDIA guy. Sometimes I hear I don't have a hardware, which is strange, but that's a real problem, right? So, what you do is you really want to test on real components, real ports. Real buffer sharing, real congestion. So, for that, you put some real components, so that that aspect of it gets tested. And then you surround with emulator. Emulator, you know, I will define simulation emulation, right? There are many definitions. Simulation is it acts like a duck, it quacks like a duck, so it's a duck, but what is inside could be whatever, right? And you could do quite a bit of it in software, you could scale, you could put thousand things in it, right? The emulator is where it acts like a duck, quacks like a duck, but if there is a problem, you can go in and see this. So, the implementation inside has is not the real thing, but is something so that if there are issues, you could uncover, surface those issues, and debug and. And find some insight. So, a simulator or emulator can never replace real. But a simulator is a high-fidelity simulation and they can be sometimes little faster, whatnot. So, you would kind of build these large systems with some real components, some emulators, and some simulators. Thereby, you are doing not only the functionality testing. But you are testing things at scale. The real problems are showing up only at scale.

There's a lot of issues that came up in the industry, I won't name the companies, right? Because they're all doing system-level testing. And that's why you see hyperscalers asking everyone else, do system testing now on whatever you are doing, or run the whole AI test and then. give me, whatever that AI means. And that AI test, to answer your question, when you say AI test, so this is this is how you should think, not like, hey, does my network would stop at link and packet and transport, isn't it? Whereas collectives and applications is you cannot call it network, this is really an AI test, even though AI is everywhere. So you would want to those tools exist. You can model your storage plus compute, plus network, you can model all that stuff and try it out and see are you AI ready. Even if you are doing a small memory chip, you can test it in this full context. Triggers and events need to be that way, right? it is how what happens when there are sixty four uh k GPUs? Because maybe you need to uh you know uh you need to really you know talk to a million GPUs, that means you need so many Q pairs, so many flows. Maybe you have a flow table limitation, how would you how would you surface that problem? So you can do that kind of scale testing. Right, long answer, but hopefully you write what you want. Any question? No? Once, twice, thrice. Okay, done. Thank you. Thanks everyone.
