SNIA SDC 2025 - Advantages of CXL for Storage Applications

Let's get started. I got the signal. So hello everyone. Hope you guys have made it through the first day. And I think this is the last one or the last session, but that's okay. So I I'm here to talk about as my uh as the title says here, uh the applicability of C Excel uh for storage applications. Uh a few things about me. So I'm here representing the C Excel consortium. I'm the marketing chair now. I used to be the co chair, but the other person uh Resigned recently to do other things. So I am now the chair. And MWG stands for Marketing Work Group. And in my day job, I am direct, not director, I work at Intel in the product planning and the CXL initiatives group. So basically, on the Xeon data center CPU. So in today's talk basically I'll I'll talk about how CXL you know, this is a storage conference, so what how CXL can help the storage cost is really you know natural. And I'll show you some example cases based on submissions or other presentations from our member companies. All right. So let's begin with a quick primer. I mean this slide has been shown few times now thanks to the previous speakers. So I I shouldn't spend too much time. As I said, she she told me I have only ten minutes. But everyone uh here I assume knows what CXL is. The first two are the accelerator types. Unfortunately, there are not too many accelerator devices which are on the market today. There are a few, but they are all FPGA based because most companies are doing some specialized accelerators that I know of.

I come from Altera and that's where their main thing is actually the accelerators, right? So, they are the PGA, they have a CXL hard IP. But today, it's more about the use case 3. And as I said to the previous speaker, I have the same animation. We'll focus on that. And the type 3 CXL device is nothing but a memory buffer. So, yes, the way you can add More memory to the processor is by sticking a CXL memory card on one of the PCI interfaces of the processor. And yes, you need this CXL to DDR protocol converter ASIC. We call it the CXL memory controller. And then you have the regular. DRAM, whether it's DDR4 or DDR5 or LP DDR, CXL is agnostic because as long as the controller can support what memory is below it. In fact, at one time, since I said I'm from Intel, we had the opt-in memory, which was, as we all know, it was like a storage class memory, and even though it Was much lower bandwidth, overall bandwidth compared to the rest of the DRAM. We could support it. The CXL controller was going to be there natively. It was all designed. So, anyway, so CXL is agnostic, and that opens up a lot of opportunities, as I'll show you in the next slide. Again, all of you have seen this slide before. With the introduction of CXL, now we have two more tiers, if you will, within this memory pyramid. Below the main memory, we have the CXL memory, and then below that, you can expand it even more. That means more latency, as that latency arrow shows on the right. Right. It's a fabric attached, meaning have more memory attached to the CXL switch. But there is one anomaly, right?

As my next, the first use case I'm going to talk about. This was from Google and Meta. They actually showed this slide and they say, what's the Anomaly in this picture, right? Everyone agrees on the bandwidth trend, this is all correct. Latency increases as you go down the pyramid on the right side, bandwidth goes up on the left side. And the cost also goes down, cost per gigabyte should also go down. But C Excel memory, if you just use a memory controller and a standard DDR file. The cost is not necessarily less than the main memory DDR5. So they propose some ways which I alluded to earlier, by using other tricks, how we can actually reduce the cost of CXL memory. But that's one anomaly which needs to be acknowledged. But that doesn't mean any DDR5 based C Excel memory modules are doomed, because in the end, it still improves performance. So, a lot of people will pay for performance, so it's still okay. Even if the cost of memory is somewhat higher than main memory, a lot of people will take it. So, here's the Slide they showed, and this was in a C Excel webinar last year. And their use case was simply like a Z swap, right? How many of you are familiar with the line of Z swap? I mean, that technique has been around. Some people call it, I heard some today it was called something else, but I thought it was called Z swap. Essentially, it is uh a swap uh swap space application.

It's constantly uh uh it's it's doing a telemetry on which pages are called in the main memory and saying, okay, move them out to uh another tier like they use the C Excel uh normally you'd put it on a hard disk drive or SSD drive. Instead, they put it on the CXL. And so, my analogy is like a refrigerator, right? So, you have a kitchen refrigerator, and then you have a garage refrigerator. So, to keep the kitchen refrigerator open and roomy, you keep on moving things a little bit longer term, which you don't need to. The garage, right? So that's exactly what they're doing. And on top of that, they're using the compression technique. So, because they claim the cold data on an average can compress two is to one. So, before they send that cold page down to C Excel memory tier, they will compress it. And then the next slide. Shows how they save the cost of memory. So they openly advertise that hey, we will reuse our DDR4, the existing DDR4 DIMPs. So that's their way of saying we already have those DIMPs. With the advent of Gen5 servers, those DIMMs will be recycled. We'll instead use them here. And I'm giving the details of how they plan to use that. So, they can really create a CXL memory tier, which also obeys the law of cost. Like, that tier has to be lower than the DRAM tier, and this is how they do it. And because it's a CXL controller, it can. Hide the DDR4 bandwidth, even though it's less than a DDR5 bandwidth, it can manage it. So that's how they did it. And the reason I'm showing it here because a swap space is a SSD-based application.

I'm just saying how CX is helping the cost, right? So it's applicable to the storage. Conference. Okay, so that's my first use case. Okay, and then I'm showing you another slide from the CXL 2.0 specification. So when we introduced that, one of the big things they introduced, and this was at At behest of, I believe it was Microsoft Azure at the time, but you all know why. The original motivation was a TCO motivation of memory pooling. They are saying, hey, we'll go broke the amount of servers in our data center. If every CPU is now packed for the worst case, memory usage, then we'll go broke. We are Microsoft, but it's still right. So they claim a lot of it is not used, all that is stranded, so you have better off putting it in a pool. So that's the original idea of the pool. But as you know, later on in 3.0, the basic TCO saving idea of the memory pool. So before I go to the next thing, the concept. Is any host shown here in 2.0 could only access or get a private copy of whatever extra memory it needs at runtime from this pool. Now, if you can also do sharing, now this TCO play goes from Beyond TCO to a performance play. Because something like map and reduce are all these big data applications where the host will crunch a big pile of data by first divvying it up into several pieces and then they exchange it before they begin the reduce process, right? So that's the classic map and reduce. Now that exchange happened over Ethereum. Networks, more latency, more extra networks.

Now, with C Excel memory pool, at least for a certain data set sizes, you can contain it all there and you can pass the data by reference, thereby saving on latency and hardware, and overall it's a performance way. That's how it was proposed. But now, in this day of AI, right? Some of people have shown already. And I'm going to show you one other example which one of the member companies is working on using the memory pooling concept. And then just looking at the picture, you can think of my other comment there. Backward compatibility, you know, the C Excel switch is also, so today this kind of thing. Company XCON, they have this switch chip in the market, and it is backward, meaning you can put PCI devices or SSDZ one over there. So one can think of other applications in this thing where you can do checkpointing or something locally within the pool, and then later on, any host can access that. Checkpoint. So, there are a lot of other things. Although, till they are proven and somebody has shown a product, I don't want to just speculate. But you can intuitively think about different applications. So, this is an example which one of the companies, Memwers, who is a CXL, they are a software company mainly. then put out some good um uh software for doing memory tiering initially at uh version 1.1 and now with 2.0 and 3.0 uh they have put out their GISMO software, I'll talk about that, but they can actually enable CXL memory sharing uh using uh the CXL memory pool.

So what this slide is showing is simply showing how, because they are working on this NVIDIA dynamo and showing that how their software can be used even in the AI workloads, right? And the picture on the right is showing you the hierarchy in an AI system. So today is the HBM, host memory, and then below that. Is local SSD and then network storage. So, what they are proposing, once again, after the host memory, you have local SSD, right? What if we can do an intermediate tier? And which is what they are proposing, and they're going to put out a proof of concept in the near future where they are showing. How by using this CXL memory pool, which can now become a tier before you ferry the data over network to some other host, which Nixel or some of these other LLMD things will do, you can actually use it for storing the KV cache, KV block managers locally. And by the way, even before the memory pool back in the direct CXL attached memory use case, few CXL companies have shown how KV cache can be used to store on the CXL memories rather than SSD on a single node and make the GPU go faster and basically stall it. Less. So now this is showing even in the grand scale because now everything is scaling up. That's in two years. It's amazing how much the AI workload complexity has gone up. So that's what this slide is showing. And so that's another, once again, CXL is here and can play a big role even in the AI side. Of things, the side of the market. And then my last example is a startup company, and their reprendatives here is called WALL-I technology.

What they are showing is they are aiming their product for a PCI link constraint CPU. Meaning, read high-end desktops or hopefully laptops in the future. So, in such CPUs, unlike the big Xeons, you don't have the luxury of having six PCI links. So, today the big Xeon can say, okay, leave some PCI. Things for storage and networking cards or GPU, you can use the rest for C Excel. Because you have six of them, you can definitely add C Excel memory. But in a high-end desktop or a workstation-class product, you don't have that luxury. So, what they are proposing is: so, left-side graphic shows on a big Xeon how you have the luxury of both. Storage using pure PCI, or you can make use of it as a C Excel on the left side. And then on the right side, what their device they're going to launch is showing is how you can have both storage, LOS, C Excel memory advantage, because now they're. Their card will host, and I have a picture of that coming up. We'll host the SSD on one side of the card and will have the CXL DRAM on the upper side. And what they are saying is basically run NVMe or CXL because NVMe is a PCI protocol, it can run over CXL.io. You can do a lot of interesting things. Or part of that DRAM you could expose directly as C Excel memory, not as part of the NVMe driver memory. And interleave it with the main DRAM and increase the bandwidth of your system. So all kinds of interesting applications for the HGDT or the high-end desktop. the workstation market.

And here's another slide on the uh what exactly they are proposing and they are proposing they will use L P D D R five because uh lower power i i you know i is key. So these are these are the specs and then this is the slide they gave me. Which I'm showing. And so that's, I think, pretty much it. So to summarize, right. So CXL memory, as we know, is still new, but definitely helping the storage industry here. The CXL-based applications are Definitely beginning to emerge. C use of C Excel memory as an in-bit, basically, it's a use of C Excel memory as a tier between DRAM and SSDs. So helps with memory capacity expansion, as we know, and helps alleviates pressure on the SSD layer for many emerging. And then Yes, as the memory pooling goes, there's a lot of excitement in the hyperscaler community as well. And then, as I said, it can also be leveraged for doing AI. So that's my talk. So you mentioned switchblades pooling. You didn't mention multi-headed controller pulling. Smaller pulling, if I may. That is something that seems to be a TCO advantage to it as well, latency advantage to that TCO. The multi-head uh on the right now though, uh I don't know of any any particular company who's going to put out a direct MHSLD. There is a switch-based company, that's why I mentioned the switch, that's what you can play with. We contribut uh CD contributed uh to OCP last year, a multi-headed appliance. Correct. Yes. And that just seems to be it was a P O C. Correct. But there could be potentially additional work towards two dot oh uh basic base. Yeah, I uh I'm from Intel.

I've talked to Mohammed and uh you're not Mohammed, no? Oh, you are Mohammed? Ah, okay. See? We just talk our emails. So you flew out from Minnesota? Yeah, well, basically, the whole team is here. Okay, good. Yeah, we'll definitely. Okay, no more questions. My talk must be clear. Okay. Next speaker, yeah, sure. Okay.
