SNIA SDC 2025 - Why Should We Have Yet Another Enterprise and Datacenter Standard Form Factor for SSDs

Good afternoon for those that are here. I titled this long nice title, Why Should We Have Yet Another EDSFF form factor for SSD? And the reason why I titled this is because this is a common question I've gotten further, well, since we started this project, but even before that. So a little history on form factors. We kind of had the form factor wild west when the first HDDs were invented. But we've had quick changes in size and shape and everything else to where we kind of settled around somewhere around three and a half and then the nineteen nineties started and we started standardizing stuff. The whole reason SFF Committee was created was around the two and a half inch form factor to begin with. And so we, and we kind of had a little bit of bifurcation in the market at that point. You had the three and a half inch desktop and server one, and then you were starting to see HDs in two and a half, in the two and a half inch form. Factor going into laptops. Then we started seeing, then we saw the move to SATA, SAS, et cetera, and signaling connectors changed. And then we went to, we even saw smaller form factors at that time. I don't know how many of you had the iPod Gen 1. You know, that was. Nice small form factor, HDD to begin with. And then we started seeing the SSD creations, and that's where we had the two and a half inch set of SSD. In the early 2010s, we had what we called the mini SSD, which went through an iteration or two before we had M.2, which we all know is being used in lab. Laptops and other places, including servers.

Mid-20 teens, we standardized U.2, which was specialized around servers, but hopefully to get into other places as well. And then a lot of us started work on EDSFF that was more specialized for usages. So, the reason why I wanted to. To talk through this, is what are the trends that we see here? And there were really three trends and plus a result. Really, the HDD market is stabilized, but it took a long time for it to stabilize, right? I mean, you kind of had, like I said, the Wild West, followed by a general stabilization. Probably in the 2010s. I mean, even, well, in the 2000s, basically, but even in the 2010s, really, where you started having consolidation. The new form factor cadence has increased. And I would actually lump that in with the third one, which it's due to fragmentation, right? Seen markets change over time. We've all seen, you know, oh, there's this new usage, what happens? And those new usages drive different shapes and sizes and everything else, connectors, et cetera. And one of the things that resulted from this was EDSFF, where we were seeing that trend towards data centers. Specific and enterprise-specific form factors at that point. And just on a side note, since I get asked this question, you know, why are there so many form factors to begin with? And why we actually started with a lot in EDSFF, I'm going to actually answer that today. The short answer is that if you look at the 2.5 inch hard drive, 3.5 inch hard drive, M.2, even SATA to, or even the U.2 to external scent, you had multiple sizes.

You had multiple thicknesses of those SSDs or HDDs for that regard. So, whenever I hear, oh, there's an E1.s, there's an E1.L, there's an E3, why are there so many? I look back at that and kind of think, well, over time we've kind of figured out how to adapt, how to whittle that down. And there will be natural selection over time as well for that. Okay, so this gets us into EDSFF. I think most of you know this, but really, I kind of dredged some slides up from 20 when we first started talking about EDSFF. Feels like a long time ago now. But really, the goal was commonality across a set of form factors, right? We were trying to keep the same, we were trying. Make it easier, easier to adopt, easier for system development. Basically, the only thing that was changing was the shape of the box. We had a few different sizes and shapes, and those shapes were actually around different usages. And actually, I borrowed a little bit from John Geldman, in fact, in some of his terminology. But you had the You had the enterprise storage, you had the data center compute, you had the data center storage. Actually, that's even on, I think, was on some of our original EDSFF foils. We had these three form factors built around three usages. And all of these met the same connector, all of them had the same signal integrity. Great. So we're done. Right? We all finished that until about a year ago when new opportunities came up.

And what I did here, this is a little bit of an eye chart, but it's kind of the noise that we're starting to hear in industry, and we've been seeing in industry where, you know, QLC, NASA, Scaling, you know, has continued to lower, the costs continue to come down over time. And that's in coupling with that, you've had the HDDs having difficulty scaling performance per terabyte. There's been articles, there's an article from Meta on that. In fact, they had a blog post on that. Probably, what was that? Yeah, just this year, on talking about some of that. And one of the things that has been highlighted in that was the QLC performance is lower than TLC, but you know what? It's better than HDDs. So actually, Curry even brought this up earlier in the keynote panel. And you know what, the hyperscalers have expressed targets on this. In that same blog, there was actually, the quote in the blog was: KLC flash occupies a unique space in the performance spectrum between HDDs and SSDs for servicing workloads that still depend upon usage, upon performance at 10 megabytes per second per terabyte. Where we had 16 to 20 terabyte HDDs. So you couple that with also the foils from OCP Storage Tech Talk that also showed a similar number to that. And you start seeing there's a new opportunity here built around bandwidth per terabyte. So really one of the challenges that we kind of ran into on this was, you know, if you look at the middle column where you've got your capacity tier, everything looks great except for one, and it's really that acquisition cost.

And, you know, you kind of look at that and how do you really minimize that cost? Well, you could look at it from just a pure SSD perspective, or you could look at it from even a rack scale perspective. How do you minimize that cost of putting together a system or a number of systems to build up a huge storage network that you can minimize the cost with? Right? Maximize T. So, one thing to note here, kind of like you want to increase the normal capacity of the SSD, the reason why you want to do this is because, hey, that's less components overall in the system, right? You know, if I need, if I have 48 drives or I have 24 drives, It might be the difference between X number of sleds, X number of processors, X number of or X PUs, X number of network cards, et cetera. So finding that nominal, so if I increase that capacity, that's great. But if I increase it too much, then you start seeing the opposite end of the cost curves where, hey, now you're talking more boutique storage at that point. Point. So, really, it's finding that nominal capacity. And, like I mentioned, nominal capacity, less SSDs to hit the same rack capacity that reduces a lot of the non-NAND components, right? You're buying storage in this sort of space, you're buying storage for storage, right? So, you know, the more capacity you have. Have the more money you're spending on other stuff besides storage, it's kind of wasted dollars at that point. So, really, this is, but you have to add an adequate performance. Sorry, Curry, I'm quoting you from earlier on that.

But really, it came down to how do you reduce the number of non-NAN. Components per rack, how do you reduce the number of SSDs per um per rack? How do you reduce the number of control nodes per rack? And other components in between in between there. So this is all predicated on basically the goal there of bandwidths per p per terabyte. I would argue that's a very hyperscalar point of view. That is a one point of view. Yes, that is correct. I would tend to agree to that. But it also depends on the. To build your system towards various deployments, right? And sometimes those deployments drive different requirements and different efficiencies for that matter. So, agree. So, what was the solution that we looked at this? Well, it was this new tier called the Capacity Tier S. This has been called a couple other things. One of the terms is nearline SSD, but basically it's an SSD built towards a lower bandwidth per terabyte goal, right? Somewhere that you've got the right, just enough performance at a low enough cost. And some of the ways you do this, this is we Micron's personally mentioned this a couple of times. We've talked about cloud storage optimizer CSO NAND. There's other terms for it in industry right now. There will be more, you'll hear more news about this in the future from an industry point of view, not just from a Micron point of view. Which I can't talk about at the moment. But there are paths towards optimizing NAND for this more, tailored more towards this capacity tear. Looking at higher number of NAND dies per SSD, that's a big one. That's natural form.

Factor fit. Cost-optimized bomb, again, goes back to the device, you know, the device itself. And I kind of did a swag. We all kind of have numbers in our head of what things are, so I kind of just wanted to kind of lump things together. And you've got your performance SSD, your capacity. This is not by all means. You know, this is my view of the world, so others may have different views of the world, but that's kind of where I was sitting when I was looking at this. So, really, the challenge came down to when you kind of look at: okay, what do you need for maximum? Basically, hitting that good enough or low enough cost at a good enough performance, you know, how do you cost optimize that? How do you basically come down to how do you get a thousand NAND dyes in a single SST? And there's a few different ways to go about doing this. You could Use the current SSD form factor and double the NAND NAND dies per package, right? You can go, you know, right, we're just doing basic algebra right here. 32 times 32 is 1024, right? You could use a current SSD form factor but make things, but make them thicker, basically, you know, instead of doing A like a E3.L1T, you can go E3.L2T. You can go down that path. Or you can go down the new form factor path. Both options 2 and 3 are kind of using the same NAND device packaging, but you're basically just finding different ways to. Push the balloon, right? At the end of the day, a form factor is fungible based off of the different dimensions. So at the end of the day, you know, you push one dimension, something else has to grow or shrink.

So looking at these different options, so let's look at doubling names. Dyes per package. Okay, you could use this in U.2, E3, E1.L, etc., but there's challenges. There's cost challenges. You know, one of the challenges is putting more dies in a package is not easy. It's not cheap. You will have yield fallout. You will have other problems, manufacturing problems. So, you've got to deal with that. That's a cost problem at the end of the day. You've also got the package size and the package height. As you shove more things into a package, that package has to squeeze. Just like it's the same problem as an SSD, right? But you're just trying to shove them into a single package. That package has to grow. And that starts breaking some other things, right? You could break Z height of a particular form factor. You could break XY or not get as many NAND packages onto that specific form factor. Also, thermals start coming into play. And it depends on what performance targets you're hitting at the end of the day, but you talk 2x dye density. And if you're trying to access all those planes, you're talking more power. It's probably not 2x at the end of the day. That's a simple first order math. It's probably smaller than that. But at the end of the day, you are talking increased power. And that increased power is in a localized area, a lot harder to dissipate. So you've also got the thicker form factor option, U.2E3. You basically go multi-PCB at that point. That has its own challenges. You've got a wider SSD.

So you actually get less SSDs per sled because you're basically doubling the performance or you're doubling the capacity, but But having the number of space in the sled, so half the number of SSDs, that has its own challenge because now you're chewing up, you're basically chewing up real estate where you could have another SSD. So then the question always then comes to why you have one SSD and not two SSDs. The other thing is. Doing two PCBs connected to each other has some ugly challenges from a design point of view, right? You're talking cost because you're going to have to connect the two boards together and that's not simple. You also got SI problems because you got to, you know, those signals have to go from somewhere to get to the other place. And it's a challenge and it does add up in time. And you also have the thermal challenges, right? You've got, you're maybe talking NAND on two PCBs, you know, both sides of each PCB. You know, you're getting a lot of heat concentrated, especially in that middle area where the two NAND devices are facing each other. You got heat that's just not easy to get out to the outside. You got to find creative ways to go do that. Again, it becomes a cost challenge. So, then the other option, which it's funny because I think one of the first things that came to mind when I started thinking about the new form factor approach. Was why are we doing another form factor? And that was for me. And it was one of those things where it's like, will this work? You know, is this the right way to go?

But if you do grow the PCB, you could make this work. And with one PCB, you don't have any extra connectors, you don't have any extra cabling inside the SSD, it's simpler. You've got more space. If you make enough space, you've got enough space for larger packages. You can go to larger components or do cheaper components for that matter. You get flexibility there. Flexibility equates to cost, right? It could take less design time, it could take less complications. Get to, you know, having the having a new thickness or a defined thickness that may be different allows for better thermals or taller components, right? I mean, I can go to six millimeter, you know, basically go open open slit or open. SSD, something like that, and I might not get as good thermal dissipation because I can't meet whatever specs. Versus if I go to 9.5, I got a little bit more thermal mass. Or if I go to, you know, versus going to 7, I might have to run into trade-offs because of flight, you know, because of space reasons. You know, so there's different trade-offs there, but at the end of the day, Of the day, you know, if I can, if I munge that X, Y, and Z and mess with it, I can find those optimizations to hit some of those cost optimizations and thermal optimizations for that matter. And like I said before, this gets back to the title of this presentation, or maybe the Working title of this presentation, which is Yet Another Form Factor. So, kind of the options and just weighing them out.

I mean, it was, you know, engineers like to color things or grade things and stuff, and it ends up kind of being a little bit of a spreadsheet math at the end of the day, but it's one of those things where, you know, it kind of helped the decision making to kind of say, You know, option three look the better of the three options. Because there's not going to be, and a lot of what we do, we get paid for choosing the least wrong decision at the end of the day. So, this is one example of choosing the least wrong decision, right? There's, because there's never a right one. If there's a if there's always a right, just a right decision, that's a no-brainer, generally. Already been made, and you've lost out. So, this kind of led to the conclusion that a new path forward, a new form factor, was the best path forward to address this problem. So, then we get into why we have E2 and why we're here. So, really, there were fun. Fundamental goals here. It was 64 NaN packages. I think I highlighted that: the 64 by 16, that gets you 1024. If you did want to go that one capacity up, you could go to 2048 dies, get that extra capacity node at some sort of premium, but you do have that knob to pull in case, you know. There's a need. You know, we didn't want to invent something drastically new. It was painful. When we originally did EDSFF, it took a while to decide on the connector. It took a while to decide on, and actually, the only reason I think we came to a decision on the connector as quickly as we did was because of the fact that there was already.

Development work on the connector for probably a year prior, if not longer. So, but last thing we want to do is invent a new protocol or physical interface or anything like that. So, leverage wherever you can, right? That's, you know, if there's One thing I've learned over my career is how much the least amount of work I can do to get the most amount done. I mean, I think a lot of us have probably done that at some point or another, but if we only need to change the shape of the box and not change anything else interfacing with the box, then I think. We've solved the problem. I've probably shared this table more times than I'd like to admit. But you can kind of see the similarities there and how we kind of compared each of the form factors to one another and how we leveraged from E2, we leveraged E1 and E3. To build E2. Like I said, same protocol, transport, connector, electricals. The only real differences there that you see that are unique is the enclosure length and the number of packages. Everything else is copied. I'd be expelled from school for plagiarism. At this point. So, but you know, like I said, if you can leverage stuff, you can leverage stuff. But you can kind of see the dimensions ended up being 200 by 76 by 9.5. We did align the connector to E3, and I'll touch more on that and on why we did that in a bit. But the latch and carrier. more looks like E1.

So I've kind of mentioned a couple times, and maybe it's been mostly in private, but I've mentioned to people that I look at E2 not as maybe an E3, but more as an E1 that's just grown up or gotten bigger or something. I'd look at it more like an E1 and not an E3, just because of how it looks. Now, in saying that, we did do a lot of smart things that E3 already did. So that's also why kind of E2 made sense for a name, right? It's kind of an in-between E1 and an E3. Helps John have more jokes about E2, all that. Okay, so I've been asked a lot of questions: why this, why that, why all these other things, and so this is kind of my dimensional QA as to why we made some of these choices. So, why 200 millimeters? Well, you know. At the end of the day, you've got a balance between the host side and you've got a balance on the NAND side, right? How do I get 64 packages in there and hold up caps and a controller and memory and DRAM and PMIC and all these other loose circuitry? And so at the end of the day, we played around. I think we had a number even bigger than this. A number smaller than this, and 200 kind of again found that Goldilocks zone of length. This gave us, like I said, good balance. I think if we would have gotten more than 200, we would have probably had gotten a lot more yelling. If we got less, there would probably be some SSD manufacturers that might not be able to. Hit it, or there might be future SSDs that might be able to hit it, not hit it. So it was really trying to balance the limitations. This also gave us some good space for thermals.

You know, we could space out the NANDI better. We could actually do some interesting things. If you didn't want to put 64 on here, for instance, if you wanted to do 32, you could do one-sided. You could think about what you wanted to do going forward. For certain thermal applications. And lastly, it allows growth of the NAND dyes if that was absolutely needed, right? As we start looking at if we want to increase NAND capacity over time, you know, we don't know what the future NAND package is going to look like. I'd hate to stick us into a certain NAND package size and base it around this report only for the NAND packages to grow in two years and us to be here, me here again saying, hey, there's this new form factor, it's called X. And everyone wanted to throw stuff at me. So Y76 millimeter. Well, this was a no-brainer. It fits in a two-year sled. This has been proven on E3. And don't break what's broken. But what we did break is we went to 9.5 millimeter, which broke some of the stuff that's done in E3. But we had to kind of do that. First off, why 9.5? 9.5 you can get 32 SSDs in a 2U 19 inch sled or 40 in a 2U 21 inch sled. I think those are the rough numbers. Depends on what pitch you ultimately have at that point. Like I think 32 is like a 12.5 pitch. I think for a 21 inch sled, to get 40 in, it's a bit less, maybe like 10. And a half or 11, something like that. You know, really, this allows for taller components on both sides. Again, I don't know which direction people are going to want to go in the future for NAND components.

You know, you could build up, you could build out. So this gives that flexibility there, but this also gives flexibility for, hey, Maybe I can use some cheaper capacitors. I can use cans instead of tanalums. I can use bigger inductors. I can use bigger components that help dissipate heat, or I can put in pads or something to help get rid of that heat. Again, going with the flexibility of giving it more. Of a sandbox and building for room for the future. And lastly, like I said, more volume for thermal dissipation. I think we found that 9.5 does have better thermal dissipation. Being able to spread it out just by having more thermal mass in the enclosure itself. Quick question. Yeah. Symmetric in the case? Or is it offset to one side? When you say the board, do you mean the connector or the versus the connector? The PCB within the enclosure. When you're talking the 9.5 Oh, it is. I don't I'm not sure why that line is. Is in there actually? Yeah, no, okay, so it is a symmetric, yeah, that's a great question. So it is a symmetric, it is symmetric. So you've got, yeah, so actually the measurement, yeah, I don't know where that line came from, so, but it's three point, so I've got basically four millimeters, four millimeters, and 1.5. It's really 1.673. 3.96, but it's symmetric. And again, that's again one of those learnings. Like, with asymmetry, you can have an imbalance for thermal profiles. You can have an imbalance where, hey, I want to put taller components, but I want to put them on this side, but I can't now, so I have to be, I'm forced to go this way.

Trade-offs, there's good, there's pros and cons to those trade-offs at the end of the day. The step is latch supported, isn't it? The step is for the latch, yeah. So, this again goes to the copying E1 versus E3. Actually, thanks for my straight men there. Oh, no, I didn't say, yeah, I did say. So I'll skip to the second bullet since that was just brought up. Why did we use the E1 latch mounts and not E3? Well, we didn't want threaded holes. This will probably not be a cheap SSD, so the last thing I'd want to do is strip a thread and not be able to mount a latch into it. Now, you know, or I would have to throw money to have some sort of way to not. Strip those threads. So why did we locate the card edge at the 27.7? Actually, this is, you know, so this is the exact same as the E3. This allows, so if I wanted to do something different, so we, this actually comes from an E1 E3. Concept that was introduced in the 2.0 spec of E3, where the E3.s could actually fit an E1.s PCB inside that form factor. And so this is kind of stealing from that concept where I could stick an E1S in here if I really wanted to. I don't recommend that, but I could also stick an E3. I could also stick an E3L. The only form factor I can't do is E1.L because it would stick out by about another four inches. But you know what? I've got flexibility. Again, flexibility. This is about, if you're going to build a system that can support this, but I want to balance certain parameters, I can make. Some of those decisions. And like I said, we've proven this with E3. So it was a good decision. Let's stick with it.

The most important one is: how many sizes are there of E2? There is one size, one skew. Because if I'm going to do another form factor, it's going to. Be as least amount of perforations of that one form factor as possible. So if you have sixty-four NAND placements on this thing, you've got a lot more NAND. bandwidth that you have post bandwidth coming into it. It you know, normally you play a balancing game of you balance the amount of NAND bandwidth with the amount of post bandwidth. You've got a lot more NAND bandwidth here, so are you looking at maybe redesigning the NAND to Slow it down, insert power, do things like that, balance the nan bandwidth with the host bandwidth. Those would be some of the discussions that we've were that would be related to. Yeah, I mean, those are some of the opportunities. That we get, right? There's a lot of things you can do here. Yes. But it also, you know, there's a balancing game there. Curry and I have actually gone over this in detail. And, you know, where is the current problem in the system, right? Is it the network bandwidth? Is it the, you know, because you have so many NIC cards. To get the bandwidth out of the box itself. You know, is it the front-end bandwidth? Is it the back-end bandwidth? Yeah. And it's all a balancing act at the end of the day. Right? Yeah. Exactly. Yeah, because when I look at the length of this.

Well, it's funny too, because if I look at some of the other options that I flashed before, if I was to do a 2T form factor, I still have to go out of the controller and up through a connector that's an impedance discontinuity, and then thread that out from there. I could be talking similar links at the end of the day. Especially if I'm talking like E3L. One of the concerns that I have about this is since it is dual-sided, it kind of drives you down a dual cold plate implementation if you're going to liquidate cool buttons. But I I would argue that which form factor do we not have a problem with there depending on the the Thermal capabilities. Like, I mean, there's a certain thermal dissipation where everything breaks, where, hey, air-cooled doesn't work anymore, one-sided cold plate doesn't work, so I gotta go two-sided. Two-sided may not work, so I gotta go, like, cryo or something ridiculous. Immersion. Exactly. And that's, you know, and that's TCO. At the end of the day. Actually, hold on, hold on. You know, we're making a mistake because I haven't. It's Bill's fault. My question is on the mounting holes, which you're showing over here on the front end side. So, with the increase in the host site bandwidth, which means now we are playing with Gen 6 and Gen 7. The challenge is your controller needs to sit very close to the edge fingers. Otherwise, there's no SI problems kind of cut. I'll kind of complete my question, and I know you are excited to answer, and you can see the problem. The problem with that is the controller now.

In this whole placement, the controller is stuck towards the finger side. And then, with the new controllers demanding more map table space like the DRAM, you need more DRAM placements next to the controller, which takes up the space on the control. The east and west side of the controller. Now, if you look at the whole placement and you run it through the thermal, you will see heat map being red on this side, which is the finger side, and cold on the other side. So, there's a very different distribution of, even with the best heat sinks, you will see the heat spreaders don't. Work in many of the cases with the new controllers. My question is: Is there a possibility of removing or moving these mounting holes to a little bit in between, maybe on the middle side of the PCB, which gives you 2 mm on either side? More for signal routing and more for kind of better kind of integrity for the thermal as well. Yeah. So the answer is those mounting holes are not in the spec. Those four mounting holes that you see on the card, those aren't in the spec. So the SSD can move those holes. To wherever they want. The only two holes that are in the spec are to where you mount the latch to the SSD itself. So, as long as the SSD can survive the shock and vibe of wherever you put those holes, because there might be more than four holes, by the way. So, just to be very clear, there might be, you know, you might have six, you might have eight, depending on, you know, it depends on your. You know, can your device shock and vibe without popping components off?

Put them in the middle of the PCB, too. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So that does help move the SSD, you know, the controller around. You know, it helps give you room. Also, because the nice thing about E3, I don't give E3 enough credit, so I'll give it some. Credit. So, you know, because the connector is offset higher, you have a little bit easier of a route into it. So the controller can move up a little bit and you can actually put the DREM, you know, move the DRAM on the south side or wherever you want to. So it does give it a little bit extra flexibility. So yeah, so the short. The short answer is yes. You can move those mounting holes wherever you want. It's up to your design. This class of device, you probably don't want to push the latest and greatest PCIe generation in this thing because it is a capacity play with a good enough performance. So you probably don't need Gen 6 or Gen 7. I mean, you could stay a generation behind and keep. Your power down. Shame on you for using the gen name. So PCI SIG prefers that the latest version is actually what's used, and you consider everything else to be super. Because there's an awful lot of corrections in every new revision. What interface speed you use is, on the other hand, open for discussion. But the one question I have is: how did Goldilocks convince the Bears that what she needed was a king-size?

I'm not I'm not gonna get into uh uh fairy tales oh go ahead let's see eight minutes hey Anthony hey uh So, with so many flash chips on there with SI problems coming up, would you imagine it's better to use buffered flash chips and get rid of the SI problems, or unbuffered to keep the power low? That's up to the SSD design. Okay. I will note that speaking of the Latest specs, there are an awful lot more NAND channel options than ever before. I would also argue that this is not a one-form factor to replace all. This is a form factor for a very specific. Use case and granted it looks beautiful for that use case, but it's not, you know, it's not going to replace E1 or E3. I 100% agree. This is building a form factor around an end function or an end usage. Another question, this is specifically on the Z height with so many NANs and components on the PCB, do you see that the passives, especially the inductor Z height would the Z height of 7.6 would be sufficient for the the inductor? With the heat sink? It depends on what inductor you choose. There are a lot of, you know, you've got a choice, but you know, again, you're balancing the volume of the inductor. So, but yeah, you could have some inductors, you can go with a flatter inductor and less Z height, or you can go with a taller inductor. It depends on, you know, it's a volumetric trade-off and cost trade-off, because sometimes those taller inductors are cheaper than the flatter inductors. Is there any plans to go beyond 7.6 to like 2T or more heights? This one? I'm not planning on it.

It's at the end of the day, it's going to be an industry d it's there's an industry call as to whether or not we would want to go do something like that. I would argue right now that this was just released. We need to kind of go address this and let's give it some time and if we need another one. Yeah, we we'll we'll go address it when we need to. So more trying questions. You had an E1 and an E3, how come there already wasn't an E2, and why didn't you fill that hole as well calling an E4? Okay, so there was an that's a good question. So why is there not an E2? So it was there was a naming methodology for when we originally came out with the SSD form factors. And we called E1 because it was fit into 1U. We called E3 because it was originally a three-inch tall form factor. See, I remember my history. I remember this from today. So, so, and we never had an E2. So, we, you know, so we actually, I think we originally, the full title of this spec is, it's a, it's. The Enterprise and Data Center 2U form factor. So we actually called this a 2U form factor to differentiate between E3. We couldn't think of a good name for E4. You know, I mean, we could have come up with, I don't know, E, yeah, something else, but. EDSF Gen4? Yeah. So. There there's we had a bunch of discussions over why what to name it and stuff and yeah. Um okay, so specification development specs is published. The work actually we got, this goes back to leveraging everything. If you leverage stuff in general, stuff, unless it gets really contentious because everyone hates it, it can get completed really quickly.

So this completed pretty quickly. I'm not saying everyone liked it, but everyone. Was not hating it. So it's fine. I kind of showed the recipe for, you know, if you're building a drive, like what you would use to kind of go build it or measure it or whatever. So, and this is part of the EDSF specification. It's published, it's public. You can go click on the link or hit the QR code, that will send you. I think the QR code sends you directly to the spec. Question: Does this change the thermal specs, any? Yes. We will need to change the thermal spec. That is on the list of to-do items. We've got other things. Matter of fact, this needs to get added to 1009. This is getting added to MVME, which is actually being worked right now. The fixture and the curve. Well, the curves are even the same. It's just the fixture itself is different. So we'll have to design up or dra show a new fixture for that. What is the pretend power spec for E2? Whatever the customer wants. So you gotta have the uh having the informational look at the ship. Yeah, yeah, so yeah, and we got yeah, and we had that conversation yesterday in the uh in the um basically the opinionate exercise talk. Seventy no, eighty watts. Yeah. Because that's the limit of the connector. Yeah. Now, if you can build a system that has enough liquid cooling in it that you can cool an eighty watt device, go for it. And you have the power supplies to be able to power eighty eighty watts times thirty two or forty drives. And just the drives? Then, yeah. Oh, oh, we know it. I'm the one that put it in there. Yes. Okay.

Um, so prototyping. You know, really the goal with prototyping was to show that this is manufacturable. We weren't just, you know, we didn't have any like sort of hang-ups and stuff building it. So we completed the functional prototype of the SSD. We actually showed this at FMS last month. We also showed an E2 prototype chassis last month as well, which had 32 drive slots. It's actually a 21 inch uh bay, but we put 32 drive slots in it. Um so possible future improvements. This is me going off the cuff. So everyone else can disavow what I just said, what I just say. Liquid cooling support, that's a hot. I gotta find a different term for hot topic because there's a good pun there. But I mean, we are gonna need liquid cooling support at some point. If data centers go to 100% liquid or racks or bays or whatever start being liquid only, we need to have that incorporated. So we'll have to go figure that out. Even if the SSD does not need it, we will need to go figure out it from a just from a setup because they might be living in a fanless environment. You know, optional support for desired features. There's probably, there might be certain features out there down the horizon that people may or may not want. Be E2 specific. And that kind of ties into the, you know, do we need a BY 8 or BY16 cart edge? Like, you know, if someone comes in, so some of the form factors like E3 actually evolved and we actually added networking capability to it. So E3. Can support by 16 and supports the, it basically supports the same pinout as OCP NEC 3.0, so your network cards.

So, you know, if there's something like that where there's a usage there, I could see there being something related to that. And then, you know, and that actually ties into the minor changes for use. Is outside forum or outside storage. Hopefully, no new LEDs. Just gonna make that comment right now. You know, just last closing thoughts: there's a push for good enough consistent bandwidth per terabyte. You know, the high-capacity SSDs are working to solve this problem, and E2, you know. Provides those benefits and flexibility to meet this need. Yeah. I think your mic's off, by the way. Yeah, the mic's on. The mic's off. So his question is: Bill's question is: do you need LEDs in this form factor? Bill's question is: should we go up to eight LEDs? I thought, but maybe it was, do we need LEDs? And the question is: for hot swap, the answer. LED is needed to identify the device so tech pulls the right drive out of the ga out of the box. So that one is clearly needed. Yes, Lee just confirmed activity no, and I would uh agree with that. Um I know there's some people who feel differently. But that's a more gray area. Okay. Hold on, I'm going to plug this last slide. You know, SFF published EDSFFV2. We're always looking for new members. QR code to our website. I figured out. Plug this, but yeah. Any other questions? Well, he was first. Okay, fine, fine. Okay, sorry. So, this is not actually a question, this is actually a congratulations. So, Anthony won an award for SNEA work in SFF, it being a very valuable and very Active community in SNEA. So, congratulations. Thanks.

Okay, fine. You're trying to embarrass me already. Of course. I mean, you had 45 minutes for that. So, quick question on the LEDs, and this is for my own education. I understand Ross's feedback that you need an LED indicator so that the technicians pull out the right drive and not the wrong one. But if you see any drive which goes bad or has to be removed, has to be first orchestrated, decommissioned, or kind of moved out from the traffic, has to be quiet. You remove out. So, the orchestration framework could be built that the LED indication is on those LEDs which have to be moved out. You don't have to have multiple colors of LED on the back end. The orchestrator can actually go and program which the LED in a particular pattern. Yep. And just technician, just fills out that button. We only need, yeah. I mean, if you're looking a couple of LEDs. If you're only looking to load, I mean, effectively, it's a locate LED. If you're looking to locate it, you only need one LED. You can be static. Now, if you want to do something beyond that, like, okay, so we had two LEDs, we have power and activity as the other. LED. I'm going to ignore that because like they said, I think like Ross was hinting at, like power and activity, you probably don't need it, but it was there from past EDSFF. So for the Amber LED, if you wanted to do stuff like fault or other stuff, then it comes down to how do you do that. And if you want to do that, and really, that comes down to a customer decision because that Amber LED is customer controlled. I have no flexibility whatsoever of what happens.

Matter of fact, that LED is supposed to be almost directly wired from the host. Yes. Yes. So, yeah, so. Exactly. Technically isolated from the SLC. Yes, that was my point. So, you can actually drive any type of signaling through that customer LED, which could be scanned throughout to the device, and you can identify the problematic drive without having multiple LED colours. Yep. I really want to see someone flash SOS on there. I mean, if the LOD. Yeah, LEDs, yeah, you can have the drive powered down and the LED will turn on. Yeah, sweet last question, guys. Okay. As a joke, I vote RGB LEDs along the entire card edge with the new NVMe features that you can specify the colors from the host. Real question. Uh I heard a bunch of chatter about trying to define a hot side and cold side to the drive, uh mostly for cold plates, uh but I noticed that wasn't in your slides at all. Is there a reason for that or what's going on there? That is a great question. It's not in the slides yet. We need to go figure that out. So I have an opinion, but my opinion could be wrong. Because I only have I have two choices, so it's a coin flip. So my opinion right now is we do it similar to how we would do E1 and we put it on the secondary side. Now, which would be, yes, it's a secondary side in this spec. E3 would call it the top, would call it the top side. So, but you know, this is the discussion when we get into liquid cooling where you have a hot side.

If you're going to do single-sided cold plate, you have a hot side and a cold, you know, you have a side that you want to want to hit the cold plate to. So, for that, we need to, that's where. We kind of need to make sure, hey, are we all on the same page that this secondary side's real? You know, I mean, you know, we didn't have this defined for years for E1, but we kind of figured it out because of various, you know, because of when we did the asymmetric for E1S, it made sense. But E1L, you know, kind of didn't define it. So. Sure. You wanna? Yeah. I turned it off. Turn it back on. It's on. It's on now? Yep. So hot side, cold side. Anthony is correct. There's nothing in the SFF spec today. That being said, in OCP. There's work going on on the data center MVME SSD spec. Version 2.7 is coming, and you should expect something on that topic in that spec. Okay. Thank you, everyone. Thank you, and congratulations on your work. Thank you.
