SNIA SDC 2025 - Radical Reduction in Computing Costs with AI-powered Predictive Memory Technology

I'm Gary Smurden. I'm the founder and CEO of MEXT. I'll obviously be telling you about what we're doing, but I also want to kind of, you know, realize that the topic that we're talking about, which is a significant or Radical reduction in the cost of computing with AI-powered predictive memory. I would suspect that most of you would go, what the hell is AI-powered predictive memory? But I also imagine that you would probably be thinking, how by adjusting the cost of computing are we going to, or the cost of memory, or do something with Memory, are we going to impact the cost of computing? And we'll obviously be addressing all of that. A little bit of just a brief background on myself. I previously was at a company called Tidal Scale. We had developed a technology called software-defined servers. Software-defined servers was basically the ability to take a bunch of standard. x86 computers, boot them up with a distributed hypervisor, and they look like a big scale-up system. So you can think about it as QPI or cache coherency, all of that taking place over Ethernet. You wonder, how is that even possible? It's really hard. How can you do it and be performant? The company was founded on the concept of using ML. Machine learning below the application layer. This goes back 12-13 years ago. We sold the company to HPE. Prior to that, I was at Fusion.io. I led the exit of Fusion IO to Sandisk. I was EVP and Chief Strategy and Product Officer. Before that, I was at LSI, where I had created basically all the things Flash that that company did, including.

The Accelerated Solutions division, which was the fastest-growing product line in that company's history, had been fortunate enough to touch on a lot of different areas. Ethernet on the motherboard was my idea when I was marketing at AMD and basically became ubiquitous by taking something that was very high expensive. Let's make it cost-effective, and let's just put it everywhere. So, anyway, with that, let's just kind of dive into what we are, what we're doing. I am going to take a little bit of a look back. And the reason for taking a look back is I think there, and if you'll see a lot of the inspiration and really recognizing the challenges. Is you get that by looking back. And I think a lot of people with a lot of history here, and I think it's a strength, but it's a strength that we often don't take advantage of. And so I'd like to give you some of my perspectives of this. Obviously, everybody here knows Moore's Law, the impact. It was really the driving force for the industry for many, many years. And you can see that basically representing the four parts, main parts of a computer today: processors, memory, storage, and networking, all were scaling pretty well along with Moore's Law as it continued to advance. As we got into the 90s and especially the 2000s, though, memory in particular. Really started to hit an inflection point where it no longer was scaling in the same way that these other technologies were. And that is a huge challenge for the industry today. We'll be talking about that and building up to that. Okay, so let's look at each one of these.

So, processors. We all know and have seen what has taken place with processors. Going back to Intel in 1971 with the first 4-bit processor. And of course it went to the 8-bit processor. And the 8086 was ultimately the processor, or 8088 was the processor of choice for the IBM PC and changed that company's history certainly for Forever. And processors continued to advance as we went to 16-bit and 32-bit. And with the Pentium, we started to see more integration like floating point and other capabilities, superscalar capabilities being brought into the system. And then we can kind of go to the next really big step, and that was Octron from AMD. Where we had a product that could execute 32-bit code, we could also execute 64-bit code. It changed the ground rules, and it has become the de facto processor across the industry, effectively, at least driving most of what we see today. And of course, we've seen integration now with basically starting to see. Very advanced functions and incredible packaging technology as well with chiplets that have come into play. So when you look at this, it looks nothing, nothing like it did over the decade before, but the decade before that, and you can keep going back. Huge innovation. And the evolution of networking is similar. You can go back. To ARPANET and how we saw TCPIP come into play and the evolution that took place that gave us Ethernet. Big, big point was when Ethernet all of a sudden became 10-base T. So we had the same protocol, but now we did it over a physical simple-to-deploy star network.

Changed the industry, and that's what made Land on Motherboard possible. Made it where we could integrate it in, made where we could drive down the cost. And so instead of having a $1,000 add-in to a PC, we could have a $20 bomb cost that made it where we could just add that into a PC, and it basically became ubiquitous at that point. Over just about an 18-month period of time. Of course, the networking, we've seen it basically with everything from the wireless technologies on to the terabit backbones, etc. Just been amazing what we've seen as far as the revolution that has taken place in networking. Storage is one of the most amazing of all. As we've gone from the disk drive and, of course, other technologies that drove down costs like CD-ROMs. But that was that really interesting point where all of a sudden we're all carrying around a little USB drive, and that's the way we could share information. And then a little startup based out of Utah came up and said, Take that technology and create it and create an enterprise-class product out of this flash technology. FusionIO was successful in getting into Facebook, getting into Apple, and other places. And basically, they brought in this idea that we could use software and DSPs to make this otherwise really. Pretty rugged, I mean, pretty fragile technology perform well, and they were extremely successful as of that. And basically, the industry changed, and we've seen it everywhere since then. Of course, we have cloud, and we all use it for backup as well as for storing things.

But when you look at Flash, When you look at Flash technology, to me it is absolutely remarkable what we've seen over the last decade, a little decade plus. The industry was predicting the demise of Flash and DRAM, and that's why we saw startups like Pneumonics, which was then acquired by Intel. We call it Optane product after that. That. But basically, the demise of flash was all but certain. Why? Because Moore's law, we're trying to scale things down. We don't have enough electrons to carry a charge. We certainly don't have enough electrons to carry a charge at multi-level, like we wanted to do as we go from SLC to MLC to TLC and beyond. And then all of a sudden, something happened that I certainly didn't anticipate: is that the industry went the other direction. They said, oh, we're not going to go and push the process technology, we're actually going to relax it. We're going to get more bits per cell, okay, so with QLC, have 16 levels of charge. We're going to stack it and start to go 3D. And of course, now we're over 200 and even 300 process layers in a NAND device. It is just a skyscraper, and it is continued to be advancing. And it's just phenomenal and shocked the industry because we have better performance, we have better reliability, which is what nobody was predicting 10 years. Years ago, and we also have, of course, lower cost and more density as well. Okay, so let's talk about the evolution of memory. We have a 1T1c cell invented in 1968 and patented by IBM. Two years later, Intel brings out the first commercial DRAM device.

We can fast forward and see all the architectural changes that have taken place since then. And basically, it is the same fundamental technology that has taken place this whole time. And obviously, it's been, I don't want to take away from the amazing things that have taken place with getting it to continue to work despite scaling. It down, but fundamentally, it has not changed. It has not gone 3D. There's been all these, you know, different attacks on this technology. But I say this, but keep in mind that if there were a podium of first, second, and third in the memory category, DRAM holds all three positions and has held it for now, what, 55 years? Absolutely amazing that it has not been dethroned as the memory technology. It had a cost advantage over SRAM: six transistors versus one T plus a capacitor, and so that was enough to make it where the problems with having to use or control or all these other issues that go along with it. More power were outweighed by the density and cost benefits. So, this is bad, but it actually gets worse. And the reason it gets worse is because DRAM actually used to be used as the process technology to drive innovation in the industry. You would, every manufacturer, Intel, AMD, you could go down the line, they would use their memory technology to drive the latest lithographies, and then basically move it over to the logic process. But that changed, and why? Because of this issue that I have around there's not that many electrons left. And so basically, it's been left behind while logic technology now is in the two, three, four.

5 nanometer range, and it's running certainly above 10 and in the 14, 18 nanometer. That's not to say there isn't less than that around the logic processes, but the cells themselves haven't really advanced. Now, just to highlight the problems that the industry faces go beyond this, SRAM, which is just Using a logic process to make the cells, it is no longer scaling either. 10 nanometer to 7 nanometer saw what we would expect: a 50% reduction in cell size, right? 10 times 10, 100, 7 times 7, 49. So it would see that. As we went to 5 nanometer, you would think, oh, we would see that drop in half again. Did not take place. Why? Because it's having to hold a state, it's having to hold it reliably, it's having to hold it with a lot of other things happening around it, and it isn't there. So, actually, you look at the caches on a processor today, the logic will be in that 2, 3 nanometer, but the SRAM cells themselves had to be reliable. And they are relaxed, and that of course, if you look at one of these devices, it's bringing all cash, or so it seems, right? It is amazing the amount that is on these things. So, we have a big challenge here as an industry. And just to highlight, right, the one thing that has been consistent is that software will expand to fill the available memory. And there's a lot of reasons for that. Certainly, the breadth of data in everything that we deal with today is amazing versus what it was back in the day. But you think about a single medium-resolution photograph right now takes more memory than a thousand of the original PCs. One photograph.

More than a thousand PCs. It is phenomenal what has taken place, and it's just getting worse. And that's, you know, so this worse law, if you will, continues to hold. Kind of a similar version of work will expand to the amount of time that you have available. Okay, so DRAM is. Bringing a lot of drama for sure, a lot of challenges. Here's the view, my view, and our view of the top three challenges: cost per gigabyte. DRAM is one of the costliest components in a server or a computer, and as we will go into more detail on it, it is only getting worse. A big, big cost problem. Second is capacity and scaling. Basically, as we've looked at these technologies and you look at this technology, it is not continuing to advance along the way. And I'll touch a little bit more on that. So we have a problem with capacity. And the final point is around utilization. And utilization comes in multiple forms. It comes in the form of: we have stranded memory, that's one form. We have over-provisioned systems. I'll touch on that too. And then, last, many of the pages of memory in a system are actually not actually being used for large. Periods of time. I'll go into that as well. So, three big challenges that go along with memory as an industry that we're trying to deal with. And let's double-click a little bit on these a bit more. Okay, so the middle chart shows the total spend of meta. From the 2012 through 2022. And you can see their total spend on memory, and this is as a percentage of their total data center.

So I'm counting power supplies, I'm counting cables, processors, networks, everything. They went from less than 15% to a full 1,000%. Third of their spend was on DRAM. When I talked to one of the hyperscalers about this time, and there was a memory conference going on, and I said to him, There's all these things that are being talked about, you know, and HBM and this and that, and all these different memories, and C Excel everything. So, what are your topics? Top three priorities. Cost, cost, cost. This is the person at the hyper, one of the very, very biggest hyperscalers responsible for all their memory strategies. Cost, cost, cost. That has not changed. They have a huge challenge around cost. And this one-third, while that has been, now we have. GPUs coming into the picture, so it's certainly not that same one-third, but it is a huge, huge spin, and as a percentage of their compute, it's only growing. And we see it in the bottom right here. Basically, half the cost of a server or more, and that is growing, is DRAM. In fact, as we'll talk about the utilization piece, there's More money wasted on memory, more money wasted on DRAM that is spent on processors to Intel, AMD, and ARM combined. So, waste in the tens of billions of dollars per year that is taking place. Okay, capacity scaling. We already went through how. DRAM is not scaling, it has continues to not scale in a way that is beyond, it's no longer scaling in the way that we saw. And so, this capacity issue as data gets richer and richer is just getting more aggravated, and it was already a huge problem.

If you look at the amount of memory we can put around a processor today versus what we could do six, eight years ago, it isn't that different. It isn't that different. But the processor itself has gone from, you know, maybe a 28-core processor to a 128-core processor. So it is the processors have been able, or can now put with chiplets, we can now easily put more cores around it than we can stick memory around the system. So it is a big challenge for the industry. And now let's talk about the memory utilization problem. There's multiple terms that you'll hear, and it's, I think, good to understand these. The first is just over-provisioned. You put, and this is on this left, Azure did a study of the VMs in their data center, and they found that half of the VMs never access half the memory. Half the VMs never access half memory. The memory. Now you go, well, why would people do that? Right? Well, there's multiple reasons for it, but one of the big reasons is that when you run out of memory, you go off of the memory cliff. And the memory cliff is aptly named. It is a bad, bad thing to go off the memory cliff. What happens? Either one of two things. Your application either comes to a crawl or it fails. Boom, out of memory. Big problem. So, if somebody's running their job, what do you do? You make sure you're running on a server that has plenty of memory in that server because you're very conservative, because you can't tell how much memory. Your system really needs very easily. I'll touch on that too, but that's a big problem. So, over-provisioning.

Now, the second one is a term that never had entered my mind until 2022 when Azure talked about it in a paper and it got a lot of attention. And they highlighted that stranded memory can account for as much as. 25% of the memory in a server. So, what is stranded memory? I talked about you put lots of cores in a system and then you have memory around it. Well, what happens if you are renting out your VMs, which is what cloud providers do? These VMs have a ratio of DRAM and memory, of CPU, and Memory, and depending on what people do, they may run out of memory first, they may run out of cores first. But in the case where they run out of cores, what happens to the rest of that memory in the system? It's stranded. You can't rent it out, you can't sell it, it just burns power. Now, the part on the left here, just to be clear. You don't hear any hyperscalers talking about this so much. I mean, other than this one little statement, you won't hear them talk about it. Why? Because they're getting paid for it. Well, part on the right is a big problem. That's burning power. It's a waste. It's actually going exactly in the wrong direction. Okay. But the third one, I would argue, is the biggest. And that is around just the utilization of memory overall. And so Meta did a study of the four top applications that run Facebook. Now, I would say I think Meta and Facebook, they're as good a software developer that exists in the world. They actually have effectively perfect memory use. In the terms that the memory DRAM in these systems is 97 to 98% used. So there is no over-provisioning.

There is no stranding because you're using all the memory in that system. So we don't have the first two problems at all. But what they found is that between 50 and 80% of the memory, Pages of memory were not accessed for long periods of time. Long period of time being five minutes, ten minutes, or even longer. Now we're talking about processors that are obviously doing billions of operations a second. You have thousands or you know dozens of CPUs, so it is an unbelievable. Amount of time. It's eternity to five minutes to a processor. Okay, so this is a big problem. And so the combination of these, when we say there's more money wasted on DRAM than is spent on processors, you can see where that comes from. And interestingly, I've never had anybody in the industry close to this problem that has ever argued with me on this point. I think it's pretty well understood. The problem is, you can have a well-understood problem, but if you don't have a solution to it, what are you going to do about it? So we've had this problem as an industry before. I would just highlight that we had a problem that went back 20 years ago where CPU utilization was getting in the 10-15%. VMware, the startup came along, and all of a sudden, ever since then, we now have hypervisors and containers and everything else. And of course, we wouldn't have a cloud if we didn't have this ability to. Get more performance per dollar out of the CPUs. Who's going to solve this for memory? We'd like to put our name in the hat. Okay, so the industry's had initiatives.

Obviously, everybody's familiar with everything from Optane to CXL and many other initiatives that have been around. And so when we look at these, And I'll just highlight the one on the left. First, with Octane, Optane, you know, in phase change memory, it was developed when we weren't seeing a path for DRAM and for Flash. Flash solved the problem, right? We talked about that. They came up with the solution. DRAM didn't really solve the problem, but But Intel had a little dilemma. They were growing a nice business. They had gotten it up to a little over around $850 million a year. But that isn't that much money if you have to start looking at developing new process technologies and building new fabs and other things like that. And they made a decision three years ago to shut that business down. CXL is coming in, and there have been a lot of proponents around that. I know there's a lot of sessions here on that. And what I would just say, relative to the memory cost problem that we have been talking about, that Intel missed the mark. We would say that, and I think Google puts out a very counter paper to what Azure. Did about a case study against CXL memory pooling. Azure highlighted the big problem was stranded memory. Google came back and said, first of all, they're just not doing a very good job in packing, you know, bin packing, and so you can do better than that. And so if you do better than that, it's not 25%. It's much, much less.

And they also went on to say that these other challenges around having to rewrite applications to get them to run, to be NUMA-aware, all of that's a big problem, too. So, anyway, what is it going to take to drive down the cost of memory? What is it going to take? Well, obviously, you. It's the most expensive resource in the server, we got to utilize it really well. So we've got to increase DRAM utilization. Very important, and I can go back through the, you know, I went back through my experiences in my career. Every one of those experiences had where you didn't want to mess with software. Software, it just needs to run, it needs to run. Well, and maybe you'll do some optimizations to make it even run better, right? But we don't want hardware or software changes. It drives up costs, so it's driving up costs. So now I have to make that up, right? You're going to have to even go lower in your, you know, some find it back some other place, as well as increasing risk and slowing adoption. And then the last one is. We need to find a way to have DRAM share the podium with another technology. Flash is the obvious one that it needs to be. We need to bring Flash into the memory tier. It's 20 to 50 times cheaper per bit, and that percentage is growing. It's also much lower power than DRAM, 30x lower power. Power of the D-RAM. So, anyway, it's a good idea, it's just not going to work. Because while it's fast, I mean, while it's less expensive, it's also on initial latency 500 times slower. And it can even, depending on your measurements, it may even be. Times slower.

So it is a lot, lot slower than DRAM. So when we were starting next and had sold HPE and was thinking about what I wanted to do next, became very, you know, just focused on the problem around. What's going to take place? Shouldn't have that coffee, I guess. Okay. So we either write to memory or we read from memory. And writing to memory is easy because you write to DRAM, and then Linux will tell us when these pages are cold, or we can figure it out on our own. And they can be pushed off to another tier. Frankly, it could be anything, it doesn't really matter. Matter when it comes to writing because the pages are not being accessed, so there is literally zero impact on performance. We choose NVMe Flash. That's because not of writing. It turns out we want to do that because we want to get as fast as we can when we're reading. So, how are we going to deal with this 500 times slower? Slower initial latency. Obviously, today all we think of is AI. This kind of predates this being the only word that people talk about. But we came up with: we can use AI to predict what is going to be needed in advance. And move it back from flash into DRAM, ideally before it's ever accessed by the operating system or the application. Now, if you think about it, LLMs, right, and transformers specifically are really good. At string prediction, at predicting what's next. They do a great job of it. We just have to predict what pages of memory are going to be needed. And unlike ChatGPT, we don't even have to get the order of the words right.

If we send one page before the other or switch it, that doesn't matter. That doesn't change the definition. So we don't have to be that accurate. On the other hand, and if we don't use it at all, that's okay too. It's still on the flash, and we can just discard it, and it's no harm, no foul. So, this is the fundamental of our core innovation and what we patented around AI-powered predictive memory. What we do is we take a system, just a standard system, with a NVMe drive or drives with DRAM and make it to make this look like this. And there's three components. Two are mandatory, one is optional. First one is just a driver. It's a Linux plug-in. Simple as that. It's pretty lightweight. It just has to do some of the basic information around memory. It feeds our predictive memory engine, which is a user space program that runs next to the application that is running an ensemble of AI models. To make predictions on what's going to be needed and move them as described in the previous one. And then we have an observability platform as well. It's optional, and I'll touch on and show you what that's able to do and the visibility that it's able to give that people really appreciate it. So we started looking at all types of AI models. From heuristics to LSTM to transformers and other types as well. And what we settled on was an ensemble of AI models that basically has some very important characteristics. It has to be self-learning because otherwise you have to figure out in advance what application, and we don't know what application. That's going to be running.

And the other reason it needs to be self-learning is an application goes through phases and its behavior can change dramatically, and you have to be able to adjust with it. So we need to do that. The other thing that we do is we are doing, so continual learning. We are, with just a single CPU, making both. The training as well as the predictions. We're not using a GPU, we're just taking a single core to be able to do this. And so, self-learning, self-optimizing. Now, the product and the technology is obviously. Very complex, and what it has to do under the hood, our goal is to make it really easy to adopt. So, we work very closely with Google and AWS, and we deploy there. We can deploy an Oracle Cloud or any cloud because we can also deploy and are deployed on-premises with our solution. We're processor agnostic. Between Intel, AMD, as well as ARM architectures. It works with VMs, containers, as well as bare metal. And the installation can take place in just a matter of seconds. So I'm actually going to show just a very quick video showing how you would actually run and deploy our solution. I need the glasses to make sure I do it right here. Okay, so this is actually looking at two instances in AWS. You can see one has half a terabyte, the other has a terabyte. Terabyte is about 1.2 times more expensive. We pick the half-terabyte instance, we connect to it, we can check on the memory, and it will tell us that we have 495 gigabytes. Okay, we just start next, it comes back, we can now do the free-h, and you can see. See 996 gigabytes of memory. This is the exact same system.

One is a flash drive that has now been turned into making it look like memory. And while this has been sped up a little bit, it's only been sped up by about 2x, right? It's basically almost instantaneous in being able to start up a system and run it. And make it look like you have a bunch more memory. So, and as I showed there, that was just done in AWS, but it can also be done on-premises or other places as well. Okay. So, let's talk about the memory utilization, because this is a big issue. Right? Stranded memory and basically over-provisioned, those are easy problems. And frankly, there's other ways to solve it, although we just solve those kind of out of architecture and by the design. But this is showing a tool that we have called MexView, and it's showing a system. See, it has 512 gigabytes of memory up here, and you can see it's pretty good. It's using about 450 gigabytes. That's a well-utilized system in this particular one. And this is the level of visibility that most people get. We're working with one of the top semiconductor companies in the world, they were showing us their EDA and And they showed us memory usage, and this is exactly what they showed us: how memory utilization was going up tremendously. And then you can go, well, what is it under the hood does it look like? Well, you know, this is a system that has 5, 12 gigabytes of memory, half of which is DRAM, half is MEXT. And let's see what the memory. Memory of the DRAM looks like. And you can see here, in this particular case, this is exactly lined up in time.

And you can see that the red has been accessed in the last 15 seconds, the orange in the last minute, the yellow is two or something, three minutes, and then longer than five minutes in the darker purple. So basically, you can see that the system is, in this case, well, this is a well-architected, I mean, a well-balanced system here, in that most of the memory at times is being used pretty close, right? You can get to these top peaks here, but we all in it. We need more memory, it's not a problem. We have that available in double the memory in the flash. So, anyway, very powerful tool to give visibility into what is actually taking place under the hood. Now, on this same one, and these are actual captures from a customer. Environment. So you can see that in the first phase of the run that was taking place, there were some memory predictions that were taking place, and then there were more memory predictions that were taking place. But in all cases, we were predicting really well. So of the 137. 637 million predictions that had to take place, we were 97.9% accurate in figuring out in advance what was needed and being able to move that in advance. So the AI engine, using that single core, was able to adjust and go. I don't know the details, but I suspect that it had to change its. Operation a little bit between these two phases. And versus just being, if it had just been all NVMe, basically, we are much, much, much faster than if it had to go to NVMe because we were able to do this directly out of DRAM. And I say, as it will get, and it'll get better.

Because we will make our product continue to make it better, and there's lots of other things that can and that will be implemented in the future. Okay, so let's look at performance analysis here. And where we focused on has been a variety of applications. Application specific. This shows some databases and everything from key value to in-memory databases and even animation and rendering in the bottom area and graph and vector databases. A bunch of different ones that we have been working with. Our focus is on performance per dollar. Why performance per dollar? I would argue that's what's kind of driven the industry over the years has been people want the best bang for your buck, or you know, or however you want to refer to it. But performance per dollar. Performance per dollar is a mathematical equation, though. What's the performance number, and how much am I spending, and how does that compare? Ratio-wise to something else, right? And what we're going to do is exactly what VMware did. We're going to basically allow you to hold your costs or reduce your costs while having as little impact as possible on performance. Now, I'm talking about assuming you can get enough memory. In your system. There are other cases where I just need a ton of memory, so I'm having to shard my application, or I'm having to go and page out the storage. In those cases, we can outperform those, but that's an easy case, right? We outperform it because we just gave the application enough memory. So, but let's look at the performance.

And what we've seen across, and this shows three different kinds of applications showing them that 50-50 DRAM mixed memory, Redis Memcached, and Neo4j. When we started out, the performance per dollar equation works if you get above about 80% performance. The higher you go, it can even work. Lower, but we ideally you're going to drive that number up, you just make the market bigger, right, and adoption easier. And we have been very pleased that over the last year, as we have continued to develop the product, we've gotten it up from that 50% range to up now in the 90%. Percent in even mid-90s. And just to highlight the performance per dollar piece, this is just looking at the cost of an instance because we can look at it and go, what is the server cost and go price it? But a very easy way to do it is just let's go look to the cloud. And so if you want to get a terabyte instance at AWS. US, and you're just going to pay by the month, it's $8,100 a month. It's not very, it's pretty expensive. If we want to take that same memory requirement and do it half in DRAM, half in flash, add an NVMe drive into that system as well, because we need it for us, and add our license. Go down to $4,400 per month, and with the $2,575, it goes to $2,700 a month. So, huge savings, it's instant savings that take place in this. And so, from a performance per dollar, we've gone down just a few, you know, few percentage points in the performance. We've dramatically impacted. The cost, so the performance per dollar is outstanding.

And it can get even better because, in these cases, where some applications you can take it where you have even less memory, okay, and this is a case where we've gone to 25% DRAM, 75%. Percent next, and you can see on this particular one we didn't lose that much performance. Other ones, it may drop in half. You may go off a cliff and it may be tremendously off, and so you wouldn't want to do that. But in this case, the performance per dollar even goes up even more. So we've talked about the performance piece being the primary benefit and the cost being the primary benefits here, but it also goes into around power, right? And that can be because DRAM is the number two in a typical server. Right behind the CPU, and then we can reduce it by reducing the amount of memory DRAM in it, but also server consolidation comes into play, in which case the numbers go off the chart from a power reduction standpoint. So, to kind of bring this to a close. We identified three key things that needed to be addressed around cost per gigabyte, around scaling, and around utilization. And I would say, and while doing all of this, we also kept in mind those metrics: we don't want to change hardware. We don't want to change software, we want to ease adoption along the way. And we've done that, kept those metrics and those kind of mantras in place while dramatically reducing the cost per gigabyte, having scaling of capacity now just being limited now by flash and what can be done from a flash standpoint. And so it's virtually boundless.

And then when we talk about utilization, basically with this transparent tiering, because all the NUMA and all the behind the scenes is hidden from the operating system and the application, we are able to do this and bring these technologies together, addressing everything from the over-provisioning. To the stranding of memory, to not having it balanced where the actual DRAM is being utilized as well as it should be. And to kind of put it back into kind of a traditional tier pyramid that seems to be required is basically, basically. What we're doing is expanding Flash into the memory tier with our technology. And so we're able to push the line, if you will, down in that expanding the market opportunity for Flash technology. We're taking advantage of all the innovation that they have been doing and continue to do. And that's what makes this possible. So we have an amazing team. I won't go into the details of it, but I showed at the beginning a lot of innovations that have taken place in the industry from the 64-bit x86 to the internet to land on motherboard, and I could go down the line. But we have a lot of innovators that have been. part of this team and we're now in the process of also more than doubling it with an additional group that we're bringing in as well. We have a strong set of partners that we've been working with throughout on this technology and that have bought into the vision and where we're going so they've been very supportive of us as we've gone through this. We certainly appreciate their help.

And I guess to just summarize, the pain is real, it's certainly urgent, and there's a big problem that needs to be solved. And we think we have something that makes sense and is getting a lot of attention right now. That's it. Thank you. So what yes, questions please? In the case of an imperfect prediction before you run into the memory salt, most of the channels are once you're not having a great deal, but even better, the prediction would be said, and maybe there's more than anything, I think. So one of the reasons that we have, let me repeat the question actually. So basically you're asking what is the impact of when we don't predict it right and there's a memory stall that is taking place in an imperfect world. Well, if you look at the performance numbers that you saw, In those 94, 95%. To give you an idea, something on the order of 10% of the predictions were not, were missed. So we didn't get it right. I showed you one that was in that 97, 98% range, and obviously. We show that because that's as good as we've seen, right? But often we see it in that 90% range. And you see the impact on performance is still pretty moderate. Now, why is that? Why is that? First of all, we're able to size a system where a lot Of the applications, there tends to be localities, so they're running out of caches, ideally. And then if they're not going out of caches, they're running out of DRAM and doing the cache line fills out of DRAM. And then when it's not there, then it goes to us. And essentially, if I use the 90%, I just added another 9, if you will.

To how few times we're having to go all the way out there. So, and so that gives you a kind of a feel for it. But part of the Mex View tool is to help customers find that right balance. For some people, they're going, you know what? I just need to get my job done tonight. I just need a job, I got to start it at night, it's got to be there. I get there in the morning. I'm doing back testing, right? Is being a financial world example, right? I don't need it until I show up the next day. So you can size the system appropriately to get the job done. There'll be other applications where we just say we're not fit for it. I'll give you a simple example. If you're running on a bare metal system, For performance, you don't want a hypervisor, you don't want anything in there to get in the way of performance. We are going to have some impact on performance in that case. So that would just not be an application fit. I will highlight one other thing, though, in that things like in-memory databases, you know. There's a lot of times in-memory databases, Oracle in-memory database is a good example, isn't used. And so, why? Because I can't get a system big enough. So, you go and just use column, what they call, instead of using column store for in-memory, you have to do row store only. And so, analytics, if you can just move it over. Do it in memory, you typically get about anywhere from a 5 to 15x improvement if you go to take advantage of column store. That's not us. We just make it where it all fits in memory, and so we enable that to take place. So, long-winded ant.

Did I answer your question? Okay, thank you. Yes? But what the other part of the resources? Yes. So let me just repeat the question. What is our resource overhead? So we take a single CPU for running our AI as well as the driver of our solution. So we have a single CPU for that. The other Resource that we take is that for running our software and as well as setting up a local cache, we take less than 1% of the DRAM. So we do carve a little bit of that off for it. The bigger the system, the smaller percentage-wise it would be, but that gives you a feel for it. Okay. Yes? Uh so how about the the personal computer, like Windows OS and data? So um so the question was um really the question you were asking is Is this possible for a personal computer? I think that's the basic question you're getting to. And that is certainly a part of our vision, to be clear, right? There's some things, you know, literally this last week, I got an out-of-memory message on my computer, on my Mac. Right, saying you've got to close some applications down. I'm going, 16 gigabytes, how much am I actually using? I'm not using that much, but it gets confused, and all these other applications are open, et cetera. So it is a part of our vision about where we're going. Today we support Linux. We don't yet support Windows. That would be work. We don't support Mac OS. That would be work. But in theory, The concepts that we're doing and the fundamentals around our architecture work, I'll just highlight one other thing. We're showing this as running on a system itself.

We started out running this as a and developing it as a memory appliance. Just over Ethernet, not with CXL, just a memory appliance. Why? Because we saw a benefit there. And we weren't sure that we could get the AI model to work in a single CPU, right? We actually thought we might have to result in need GPU performance there. So it's absolutely on a roadmap. We have a desire to do it because I think it's a very real problem. And wouldn't that be nice for all of us just to say, I literally. Never run out of memory. I have a terabyte DRAM or terabyte of memory on my system. It would cost nothing, right, to do that relatively. I think there was another question. Yes? You had a graph which shows you how you can use the describer of the memory usage along with the with the SFP, right? Um Does that actually develop the view called the Really Instagram to tell us that you actually need all the effects amount and the rest of it would be in that? Sure. Let me make sure I'm just understanding the right question and I'll repeat it here. But I want to make sure I'm going to the right one. I think you're talking about this one. Is that what you're okay? Okay, so the question was, I think you're asking, does this really tell us how big the system should be sized? Right. And how much DRAM. So this is just one view that we have. And so I think this, while this gives you a pretty good feel for it, going, okay.

only a couple of times that we had things going that the one-minute access had gone over so it does give us some feel there are other views as we have that looks how much flash work and activity and other I/O etc has taken place so there's other things that combine that really give us that that view or are there other openings We did not find any open source tools that gave us this type of visibility, and so that's why we developed it ourselves. So the ones that Meta used? They developed that themselves, and it's more limited in what they're looking at. In terms of contention and utilization, if you're freeing up memory and so there are thoughts of memory use, you're going to be pairing that with something else that is key, right? So you've got some meshing so that you know if you aren't if system A is not using memory, you would prefer to have it paired with system B that would be using memory at the same time, so your overall resource need is less. How do you do and you you had mentioned financial systems as an month end and uh year end and they're all running scanning busters all at once. Sure. So right now the so to repeat the question, basically is there a way of kind of that we can look at and kind of parrot where systems are kind of optimizing They're being looked at together to optimize. That is important to us when we were looking at a memory appliance, but that's not what we're bringing to market right now. The system, the problem you're talking about, the year-end problem or the end-to-quarter problem, that is a very, that's a great application because.

Because it's not what happens, is that the memory peaks and the usage of the system goes up a lot. This will shoot up a lot, the actual total memory used, and so systems have to get sized for the year for that one, three, four days a year, or eight days a year. year, right? So they get paid, that's where they get sized for. But we believe and what and part of the value is that we can take care of the peaks because we have plenty of memory. We can make that memory 2x, 3x. And then the question is: are we still hitting the performance SLAs that need to be done during that time? And that's a work that just has to be done with the customer. But the bottom line is what we find is that most of the time, very few applications, it's hard for a processor to access a terabyte of memory in a few-minute period of time. It's hard, right? And locality of data, by the Way, if you do that, your caches aren't working, nothing's working well in the system. I think I'm told that time's up. I'll be happy to stick around and ask questions, answer questions, though, and I appreciate everybody's attention. Thank you very much.
