Sokovan - An Acceleration-first Kubernetes-compatible AI Container Engine

Yeah, so I'm going to present uh uh our recent work called Sokoban, uh which is a part of the Backenda AI platform developed by my company, which is uh also a server sponsor of this event. So it's uh like a story about uh like transitioning uh from our own home ground orchestration engine to the Kubernetes compatible engine. So yeah, let me start. So I'm going to cover some brief history about AI infrastructure challenges and how Kubernetes fits with AI and HPC workloads. And how Sukovan, our new framework, resolves those challenges. Yeah. And I'm going to share some future directions as well. So well, I plan to announce the official release, kind of general availability release of the For a test-based version, but still we are under active development. So we expect that the official release will be early next year. But we have devised some critical design choices now. So I'm going to introduce how we are going to like uh make it things work on working on top of Kubernetes. So I think this part is uh mostly uh familiar with many of you uh like uh AI infrastructure challenges. It requires huge demands of the uh like power and energy and cooling challenges in uh physical layers and uh Also uh software party is becoming more and more complex and difficult to maintain because of the uh like unprecedented pace of the uh like evolution of the uh AI and MS uh structures and uh software stacks and libraries and so on.

So uh even more uh we are Observing many new hardware coming every year, and also new kinds of AI accelerators for trying to find some sweet spots between the energy consumption and performance. So all these infrastructure challenges are transformed into software-stack challenges. Like uh so uh recent days uh many AI researchers uh just uh write PyTorch code when they uh make some model training code or model structures. Uh but still uh it is already well known uh that we have to deal with many many different and other like a bigger technical challenges including like configuration and the data verification and serving infrastructure or like observability and telemetry pipelines and so on to properly run and operate AI workloads in your organization and for public services. So I'm going to summarize what Kubernetes is. Of course, I think most of you are very familiar or maybe a fan of Kubernetes because it's like a cloud-native world. So it's basically a container orchestration. That hosts multiple containers scattered over multiple nodes or big clusters. So it started from Google's bulk project, which is an internal workload management system written in Google in the early 2000s. And they made a kind of Of open source as Kubernetes and donated as the first CNCF project in 2015. So, the basic design philosophy is that it uses declarative configuration to provision resources and containers and so on, and everything, every workload is abstracted as a Path, which is a collection of containers running on a single host and coordinated together.

And so many people may be familiar with the YAML structures when they want to provision something on Kubernetes because they have to input the configurations as YAML or Some JSON or some other like structured metadata formats. And for and the key of the Kubernetes kind of resilient and automatic scaling design comes from the reconcili loop. So Most uh resource observation and monitoring stuff are uh they are like uh observe the current status and uh uh finds the difference to the desired or configured states and tries to apply the difference uh t the reconciliation uh action uh to To make it to stay with the desired state. So this kind of like polling loops and this loop design is embedded into the operators and controllers in the Kubernetes. And we can also write custom operators or controllers. To support, for example, new kind of AI accelerators, new types of hardware devices, and things like that to bring them up in Kubernetes world. And the other key point is that it uses immutable containers. So containers are kind of of a fixed uh like uh objects based on like a fixed images so that we can uh always uh restart or relocate or reprovisi provision uh the containers without any uh extra state migration uh except some shared states from like the data volumes and uh others. And um uh recently uh core analysis is also being used uh in many different type of AI workloads. So uh for example, uh we have now DRA, dynamic resource allocation, which abstracts uh different device types and uh uh device uh specifications and so on.

And also uh some Kubernetes-based serving framework are using in-place pod risk scaling to dynamically increase the CPU and memory allocation of pods. But still, AI and HTTPC workload has its own characteristics and Requirement. For example, the big assumption in a high-performance workload is that a job can consume all visible computing resources from the system. So, this is a very common assumption in a slum and other HPC batch schedulers. they don't share the computing nodes with multiple users, while they can share the entire cluster by partitioning nodes to specific jobs. So that's when we try to share some resources within a single node, then we need some extra cautions. Considerations when trying to making systems based on containers. And also like large-scale training or HPC workloads require multi-node scaling so that we can like coordinate multiple Node as a single bundled job to run like a distributed training and/or like serving large-scale language models, for example, that spans across multiple nodes, multiple GPUs. And usually the batch-oriented nature of pipeline or Training jobs makes it very expensive to restart or relocate the containers because containers have their own local states based on like a scratch partition or cache partitions on the local disk. So this is kind of a violation of the basic assumption of the control. Kubernetes-like system. So we need to make some extra measures to handle these cases. There is a famous blog article about why Kubernetes is not suitable for batch-oriented jobs. But yeah, of course, thanks.

To the community's effort and many industry vendors' efforts, the things are getting better now. And we are also going to add one another thing here. And so, in containers, actually, container is a very leaky sandbox abstraction. So, it exposes many holes. Information such as a proxy info and the CCFS and so on. So we have an X CFS package which helps to virtualize the profile system for containers. But it sometimes makes some conflicts with Dima. In frameworks and runtimes. So still like making fully virtualized view of the system resources in container, Linux containers is still a somewhat challenging problem. And also accelerate is highly specific to vendor-specific implementation, so it is difficult to generalize. As a like a shareable resources. And also, multi-load scaling is a challenging topic in Kubernetes because you need some additional coordination layer to provision paths in prior to map the actual workload practitions. So Uh so in like AI and HPC world, we could you categorize the like a workload uh like uh re relevance uh uh depending on different uh criteria. For example, uh the the overall trend is uh coming from the training uh which is more like a supercomputing or HPC. Like scenarios, and now it has moved to inference to make money from developed models. And as Jansen Nwang mentioned in this year's GTC, it is evolving into AI factory for massive scale serving infrastructure. And token generation for everybody.

So in training and HPC world, we had used like Slum and OpenPBS and other batch-oriented schedulers that use entire nodes to occupy the entire node resources per user. Kubernetes Kubernetes is from the cloud world which assumes like over subscription of the hardware or consolidation and high density deployments of uh like user workloads to uh maximize uh infrastructure like efficiency. Uh uh so uh we have also many open source projects that tries to implement MLOps like Kubeflow and serving infrastructure like a K-server, Kuber AI and so on. And recently Red Hat and Google and other big tech enterprises announced the LLMD which is also based on Chrome Nettis to implement disaggregated serving architecture to Even more optimized like a transformer-based language models. Actually, our project backend.ai, this orange one, we have started making multi-tenancy-first, acceleration-first container orchestration engine in 2014. And you know that at that time there was no Kubernetes and it was in very early stage. There was no accelerator support at all. So we wrote everything from ground up based on Docker containers. And in 2020 we implemented multi-node scaling for jobs and in 2022 We have implemented GPU direct storage integration. And in 2024, we have devised many ecosystem add-ons, like inference-first serving interfaces, and so on. So now we are planning to expand our domain to current. And LLMD to embrace disaggregated serving as a change of the market situations. So, here the command comes. So, let's first quickly review the complexity of AI stack deployment.

So, in conventional web applications, we usually have Some kind of managed databases or like object storage to store some like user like static assets or user generated content and so on. And in the service plane, we usually have some load balancers or reverse proxies or fires in front of like. Web application servers and the web application server usually hosts the like main business logic implementations. Uh usually we have uh like only like a public or private networks or uh like a separation for when designing the infrastructure. Uh but when it comes to Like a fully AI capable stack, we need to consider a lot of new network technologies such as like infinite band interconnections between GPUs and from GPUs to GPUs and from GPUs to storage and so on. So this makes it very complicated when uh like configuring your workloads and uh things like that. Um so uh in Sokoban we have uh many experiences with uh deploying this kind of complex uh infrastructure with our uh customer uh sites, uh with the native babometer installations. Where we have a full control over the hardware. So let me quickly review how Sukovan container engine was first designed. So it was first conceived in 2014 to achieve a reproducible computing environment for multi-tenant setups based on container. Container technology. And the reason why we chose containers is because it provides a very thin virtualization layer on top of Linux corner objects so that the user workloads still have direct access to hardware, where we can enforce some resource constraints. In between.

First time we tried to make it like HPC or Spark Computing Oriented platform, but later Arfago defeated Isedor in 2016, and so we have changed our focus to AI because we surely knew. That GPU will be the next big thing for AI workloads. So the basic design philosophy is that we don't do resource constraining, we do resource allocation. So in Kubernetes, you can also specify the maximum CPU. Like cores and memory limits when you specify resource allocation for paths. Basically, it's about like a constraint. So multiple paths may have some overlapping opportunities. But we wanted to dedicate partitions of resources to prevent I. Like a conflict between user workload who are willing to occupy all visual resources in the system. So that's where we first designed the batch-oriented job scheduler and resource allocator. Yeah, in like first-class settings. So the main advantage is that. it can host multi-node jobs and the mark uh with for multi-tenancy isolation. And we have devised some like appropriatory flexion GPU technology and for RDMA and GPU direct storage integration uh with some selected storage partners. And uh uh it is fully capable of being deployed To air-gapped cluster environments. And we have a common computer device plug-in interface since 2017, which is basically so same to DRA. So when I saw the DRA announcement in KuroNet, I said, oh, that's what I made. Yeah. And anyway. Um yeah, of course it's it has more like a well-defined terminology and uh documentations and so on.

Uh yeah, but uh the point is that we are already supporting well more than ten different uh types of AI accelerators in the market, uh including NVDI and AMD and Intel Gaudi Twenty and Graphical, Rebellion, Furiosa, HyperXL, Tense Rent, and like Sambanoba, and many others. So the reason why we decided to embrace Kubernetes ecosystem is that there are main two reasons. So the evolution of enterprise IT infrastructure. So when we first met our enterprise customers in 2019 and 2020, like Kubernetes was kind of understood as a part of the individual applications in the perspective of many uh many of our customer IT domains. So uh they thought it as a kind of uh like implementation framework. Yeah. So uh that was a happy situation for us because yeah, because uh uh usually the GPU clusters were like newly purchased hardware infrastructure in many enterprises. So uh they didn't have like a strong dependency on the existing infrastructure or maintenance scheme. So we could persuade the people that you need to install uh our new framework for your new hardware to use it uh out of most most of it. And But currently, more and more enterprises are moving to coronet test-based IT infrastructure management. So, using it as a kind of unified baseline abstraction, not only for CPU workloads, but also GPU workloads. So, yeah, so we need to. Sell our products, and we need to hear the customer voice. So that's why we are now looking at the Kubernetes integration so that we can piggyback on the cloud-native ecosystem. And there is one other challenge.

So, actually, we had Some experimentation internally to fully integrate the CNI ecosystem to native Sukovan deployments. So, in theory, like Cilium and other, like Istio and Calico, and those like networking layer implementation says that it is. Compatible with like a Docker container, plain Docker container deployment, but in fact, it does not work well because so many parts of the internal implementation relies on Kubernetes specifics. So, yeah, for example, we could integrate Cilium and we announced some early Benchmark results in last year's Open Infra Summit Asia, reporting like 30% of inter-networking performance when applied to the native ZOCOMAN. But we could not activate the buckle-pack filter, eBPF-based network acceleration, because of some practical. The implementation and configuration was highly coupled with the coronet test paths. So this kind of situation will continue regardless of our efforts. So we decided to integrate on coronet tests in this. Sense. So the basic integration is as follows. So the basic goal is to provide transparency and observability to existing Kubernetes tooling and the management tools the customers may have. And back-end, but still, backend.ai requires full accessibility. And control over the GPU nodes and accelerators. So I think we could use namespacing and some access control mechanisms provided by the Kubernetes so that we could have an isolated cluster within the Kubernetes infrastructure.

Uh we also want to achieve the like a full performance and benefits uh uh provided by the SCOPAN uh framework in terms of like new malware, uh like uh device allocations, uh device mappings and uh uh automated RDMA configurations, all things like that. So uh I'm not sure how this could be Be like materialized, maybe multiple sets of additional Kubernetes operators or incorporating some open source Kubernetes operators, controls, and so on. Yeah, we are still looking at that part. And the basic conceptual entity mapping is that we have a concept of a logical resource group which Can partition the physical infrastructure into multiple sets of nodes. And even within a single node, we can have multiple agents to separate the resource groups for different devices and so on. Concept is mapped to node pool in Kubernetes. And we have the concept of a corner and session, which can be mapped to path and a group of paths. So there is no direct concept in Kubernetes having like a multiple distributed containers. Frameworks implement their own way, like in CryptFlow. They have replica sets and things like that. But we want to integrate our automatic configuration for overlay networks between those containers so that they can be a virtual. Temporary volatile virtual clusters. So, this is like a higher-level architecture diagram on how SOCOMAN stack working on Kubernetes. So, we still want to expose and utilize the full like a different Layers of control plane, computer plane, storage plane.

So, yeah, in networking terms, usually we say like control plane and data plane, but I just named it like a computer plane as like a high-band east-to-west traffic pattern for like RDMA connection interconnections between GPUs and storage plane. For like high-speed Rocky-based access to the flash-based storage and so on. So in control plane, the manager, back-end manager, and other management services can be deployed as Chronicles paths. And in computing, nodes we are like we abstract our like a node controller service as a kind of demon set container running as pod and that controls the paths or containers inside the like under the the local kubelet. Now we are still looking at how to make the direct control or like uh management between this backend data agent uh service and uh individual user paths because we need to go through the uh kube API server uh to provision the containers on the local kubelets. So Uh and uh so we uh have uh some like a small shim uh component that controls the inner side of the containers, which runs also inside the container uh to provision or start uh the user uh applications and services, provides basic X like uh SSH access. And like web communal access and so on. So that component can be a little bit modified to provide direct communication between the backend data agent and the user parts to make it fully controllable. This is a very like a high-level sketch and uh still we have many many things to consider. So uh the like most hot topic this year in this industry is the disaggregated serving.

So we need to uh like uh so people are trying to optimize the like infrastructure. Serving cost by applying prefill and the decode stages to like a different disjoint set of hardware accelerators. Even maybe different types of accelerators, like combining like a CPU or like a CPU program. Processing intensive pre-fill stage as using some other type of accelerator, and memory-intensive decode stage using some like HPM-enabled accelerators, and so on. So, this requires a very sophisticated coordination of the KV cache sharing and hierarchical caching. Like automatic scaling of like separate auto-scaling of prefixed containers and decoded containers and so on. So, yeah, NVIDIA has announced NVIDIA Dynamo, LED CER, and the LLMD frameworks are trying to solve this problem, but it's in still very early stage. Yeah, so we are looking at it. And as I already mentioned, we want to embrace existing CNI, CSI, and CRI integration to make it fully compatible on Kubernetes. But I'm pretty sure that there will be many pain points here because many. Of these implementations strongly assume that the hosting system is just playing Kubernetes. But if we want to make a fine-grained controller, then there may be some conflict of interest. But our main goal is to reuse everything available. Another big topic is confidential computing. So, some big techs and the cloud providers are working on this topic. So, I think this will be a very crucial topic throughout the coming years because we have now autonomous AI agents which. Runs proactively, even before people ask.

And they will have some like MCP integrations or like credential information to perform actions on the behalf of users, for example, purchasing things from online. Shopping malls and like they make a bank transactions or like order something, like things like that. So when AI agent starts doing things like this, as we already have seen with OpenAI, it's recent announcements and so on, then it will be very important to make everything private and secure. So even like a cloud providers, infrastructure providers should not be able to tap into the user information running on their infrastructure. So in that sense, confidential computing m will be a kind of big topic. So nowadays like OpenAI has announced its own like a browser so that everything runs on the user side to avoid this kind of complexities. But I think some day we have to tackle this problem. And the other thing is application hosting. So Google AI Studio and many other things, OpenAI is new pipelines. So they are trying to make a kind of no-code tools for plain users so that they can just generate applications based on a prompt. So that the most big challenge of AI generated apps is that prototyping is very easy. AI do the most things. But when we want to deploy and when we want to publicize it, we need some kind of infrastructure and data storage. So that part is still big huddle for like normal people uh for willing to utilize AI.

So I think there will be many many attempts to solve this problem and I think as a soccer one orchestration layer we could do also utilize Kubernetes already existing service fabric Implementation to tackle this issue. And the other, the last thing is the enterprise deployment issue. So we already began to talk with some of our potential customers and existing customers who are willing to operate or migrate. The entire backend.ai stack to the Kubernetes. So there will be some hassles when we actually try to install backend.ai Sukoman on top of Kubernetes because we need the full control of the specific set of hardware nodes, but this may be there may be some like conflicts between security rules, firewall rules, and like resource management policies in the customer side. And we already have many, many experiences with like troubleshooting this kind of issues in yeah. For example, like some middle boxes silently dropping the packets without sending reset TCP reset packets so that we cannot detect the connection failures and things like that. Yeah, all those weird things are happening in some customer case. Like every 14 p.m. 2 p.m. On KST, the Docker file or rules are completely wiped out. The IP table is wiped out regularly, every day, 2 p.m. Nobody knows why, but it makes the system unusable and things like that. All those kinds of things happen in enterprise. Uh I'm pretty sure that even with the Kubernetes weird things will happen. So uh yeah, there will be some time.

Uh we will need some time to uh get used, uh like uh s have some common base uh troubleshooting experiences. Yeah. So this is uh the The end of my talk. So, yeah, I originally planned to deliver more implementation details, but still we are looking at various internal details. So I just shared some high-level architecture and directions on how we are looking at this problem. Uh so uh and uh just uh note, uh backend.ai is uh fully open source, so you can just look at the GitHub uh s to see what's happening there. And uh recently we have uh adopted AI generated uh programming, so the code base is quite uh increasing in large scale. So, it may be very intimidating to read out, but yeah, we are adding documentations by the help of AI as well. So, yeah, if you are just curious, please have a look at that. So, yeah, this is my end of the talk, and thank you for coming. And listening. Thank you.
