The Journey of CXL-PNM Research - Architecture Evolution and Software Environment

Hello everyone, I'm honored to be here today. I'm Guangxin from SK High Linux Memory System Research. Today I share our CXL PNM research focusing on processing neon memory architecture and environment. In this presentation, I'll cover five key areas. First, the data-centric challenge we are addressing. Second no, I say so second, the architecture and implementation of our service. The PNM solution, which we call CMX. Third, our software platform designed for soft level evaluation. Fourth, the evaluation result of CMX. And finally, I'll outline the current status and next step of our collaboration work. Now I'll address a critical challenge, the data-centric button in modern computing. As shown in the left figure, computer processing power has grown dramatically, but memory performance has grown growth. failed to keep up. This creates a gap that becomes a limiting factor. Especially AI workloads make this worse because they require much more bandwidth and capacity as you know. At the recent AI influence summit, Google said we are already stepping into the era of large-scale influence service. Look at the right figure. Over the last two months, the token generation has doubled. In just two months, it doubled. This shows how rapidly AI adoption is accelerating. As the data set continues to grow, the bottle become critical become mission critical. Because this is the memory world, as you know, data movement, not competit anymore, is the bottleneck. Our innovation targets this challenge. This slide introduces the concept of processing near memory.

The idea is It is simple but powerful. If data can't move fast enough to CPU, bring computation closer to the memory itself. This minimizes data movement and maximizes memory throughput. Several ways to implement PNM, neo-DRM logic, in-demand processing, and our focus, CSL-Attached Acceleration. This approach significantly improves memory capacity as well as throughput and power efficiency. Now, I would like to introduce the three architectural approaches we have been exploring. As shown in the table, logic-only architecture offers maximum performance, but limited flexibility. In contrast, core-only architecture is a major maximum Using an ARM or disk-fiber processor maximizes your flexibility, but sacrifices pit performance. So, hybrid architecture combines that case the PIC logic with a programmable ARM core. So, delivering Both high performance and flexibility. This high-product approach is fundamental to our CMMX. Let me examine how we implemented this in CMMX. Through this tool, our first-generation CMMX was loaded only architecture. It was built to validate the basic concept and prove that neon memory processing could work. It worked well, memory bound search operations learn dramatically faster with much lower energy consumption. But It was rigid. You could only learn the fixed colour built into the hardware. So we evolved to a hybrid architecture by adding ARM cores. Digit core learned formula that accepts a high-level command and break them down and feed them to the processing engines we call our PFL stand for pretty material function logic.

This gives us programmable offload without sacrificing data boss efficiency. Let me walk through our software platform. implements the three key layers. First, phase integration. CNMX is easily adapted to popular vector database with minimal code change. Second, the LLM-based compiler lets developers define costs. operators speed up development of new algorithms. Third, Kubernetes device flow and support. CNMX learns smoothly in multi-tenant environment. Now let's examine the software components in more detail. First of all I'll demonstrate our FISE CMX integration. FISE has become the vector standard vector simulator search, and it is used by almost all major vector database platforms. Our CNX library follows the Same API, so operation can be harder accelerated with minimum code change. This makes adoption seamless. Application gained immediate performance benefits without major relay. Next, CMS programming model bring user-dependent operation as close to memory as possible, making neo-memory execution both flexible and programmable. This workflow is straightforward, used just like standard C ⁇  code. Nothing special. Our LLNB compiler performs two transformations. First, host path, it compiles the CPSL binary. And device path generates the ARM binary for CMS device. On the device side, formula handles execution by loading the ARM binary and resolve the symbol, and then the execution in real time. Or translate then convert API call into the hardware command and in the same way. This architecture reflects legal workflow with a modern API-driven approach.

Finally, let's explain how Kubernetes manages our CNS resource. shows the flow of CMX virtualization process. Initially, multiple parts can request the CMX slice as an extended resource. The coordinates scheduler then bind each part to a node with available CMX category. Once scheduled, the cube lab communicates with a CMX device plugin. Next, the device flogin program the button slides via the CMX runtime. These butcher slides are isolated in memory in CNMX. Because each portal service is bound to a part, a single page conceiving device can be safely shared across the multi-tenant. Let's now examine the performance evaluations. We selected the three scenarios which aligned with spectral. Stage in the CNMX evolution. First, CMENT search ejects KNN to evaluate our logic-only prototype, focusing on performance and power efficiency validation. Second, on ANN benchmark, Leverage our hybrid prototype to see how CMX performs on the typical production workload algorithms. Finally, our multiple AI service is simulated on the Kubernetes environment. It represents a realistic end-to-end Deployment with multiple talent support. First of all, we validate our CMMX using our KNI workload. When compared to capacity-only CXL memory expansion, CMMX achieves a 4.5 times high-quality. your throughput and 5.56 times better energy efficiency. When you scale up to multiple cards, a single server with four CMX device can match it to CPU only server while consuming 30% less power. Second, in the ANM benchmark, we use a throughput efficiency as our normalized metric.

This metric shows us how close each system counts each theoretical peak. Now, this slide is a very important thing. Bring us to something crucial, small battery efficiency. Most interactive AI applications, such as real-time recommendations, chatbots, live search, operate at small battery size, typically one to ten queries for the US. This is because large batch makes more latency and hot user experience in real-time scenario. Looking at our evaluation legality at batch size 10, CMMS achieves 35% efficiency compared to CPU. Unlike GPUs that require large batches to achieve peak performance, CMX maintains consistent efficiency even though even with a single request. This happens because individual requests can already drive near steady state memory strip in CMMX. This characteristic makes CMMX especially well suited for latent sensitive interactive service. Then what about real different one scenario? In our final test, we deployed CMMX in a Kubernetes cluster, learning SK Telecom's multiple AI service workload. This results were confirmed. Two sub-pilot servers with four CMX devices delivered 90% of the server. of baseline performance while using 50 50 field server. This solution integrates seamlessly with the existing Kubernetes infrastructure. No disk migration, no software relate. Looking ahead by upgrading to DDL5480O. memory and scaling to HCMX module, we project to a 1.5 improvement in both memory capacity and software. This evolution gives us a view from prototype validation to production readiness. Let me summarize what we demonstrate about CMMX.

We started with a memory world problem, then we showed you our promising solution. CMX delivers up to 4.5 faster throughput and 5.6 times less energy. We built software. that work with the tool you already used, such as your files and Kubernetes environment. Real cluster tests show we can replace the fourth server with the tool while keeping 90% performance. This means your cost saving and energy efficiency. The technology scale linearly, so add more cards, get proportional performance. Perfect for growing AI workload. At the next step, we are building vendor partnership for CSM integration and collaborating with our cloud prov providers of validation pilots. We also verify commercialized values through an edge-based proof of concept. Especially we have a promising result from our collaboration with m Marvel. The edge POC achieves one hundred 35 gigabytes per second memory throughput compared to our FPS 64 gigabytes per second, each more than two times improvement. This is just the beginning. We are exploring partner with more edge vendors now. SK Hinix is a very good thing. Is leading this transformation. But we can't do it alone. The problem is clear. Modern AI is limited by memory bandits. CMS provides or deploy our solutions to overcome this challenge. Our prototype and soft environment is a very important thing to do. Are now available. We invite you to contact us to get started. The data centric future begins with partnerships like ours. Thanks for your attention. I'm happy to take your feedback. Thank you. Uh thank you for a great presentation.

Uh could you please tell uh about your results, uh like what kind of hardware setup were they reported on. For example, I'm curious about uh what PCIe uh speeds were on over which you got those gains. Uh what was the C Excel uh uh version? Yeah, seven. Thank you. Yeah, yeah, a actually PCI volume four in length and uh actually CXL volume uh we uh we support uh also CXL 2.0 but we compare with uh SPI server so we use uh CXL 1.1. SPL server only support uh 1.1. So yeah we we both we also have a CX 2.0 but in in in this evaluation we have to check compare with SPI so at the time we use a 1.0 1.1. So, uh when we compare uh processing near memory against processing in memory, one of the Questions that come up is you have already moved the data out of memory and spent the uh power to move data out. So the benefit will only come if you have more internal bandwidth in the device than external bandwidth. You mentioned with your structural part, you have a lot of external bandwidth. Yes. How much internal bandwidth do you have? In this FJA model or structural when the PNM in faces. to the DRAM internally. Does it see more bandwidth? Yeah, actually d this prototype is based on uh FJ and it only supports uh D DAM for to four overall four channels. So it's totally seventy six point fi eight gigabytes per sec. each internal bandwidth. Yeah. So so what is this at a high level, right? What is the source of performance improvement? Uh yeah, I I show shortly that this um the yes, so We we show the efficiency efficiency, I told you so strip efficiency.

So in case of SPI server that have a six channel and did a five O four eight O so bandwidth almost uh three hundred gigabyte per sec. So asset value CPU performance is better than ours. But both CPU and GPU does not use enough their memory bandages. They they did not utilize that. But CMMX can utilize more than GPU. Yes, yes, yes, yes. It must be that your workload has dependent accesses. Yes, right. Right? Yes. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. John? Yeah. One more thing. Oh, sorry. Yeah. If you'd like more information, Our team is at bus number A11. Please stop by our bus. Thank you.
