The Blueprint for Brilliance - QCT's Modular Approach to AI Solutions

Hi everyone, I'm Jack Low, products and solution executive at QC and Quanta. In today's sessions, we would like to share with you how we are approaching a modular design to cope with the rapid AI Uh server change in uh the recent years and upcoming years. Um from this page, um I think we can bring it back to 2015. Uh starting from DGX1, uh we are seeing uh new chips coming out, like five chips every year. Uh and has been changing quite a lot uh since 2022. Now we are seeing very, very new chips coming out, like ten more, ten plus chips coming out every year. And how do we cope with that kind of change? We can categorize into two sections. One is the ASIC and the other one is the general purpose GPU. For ASIC and XPU, it will remain proprietary and also are built for very specific workloads. But we are also glad to see that the major hyperscalers come together in OCP, promoting the same architecture like Mong Diabolo. That can help. to ease the ecosystem's pressure. On the other hand, for the general purpose GPU, we are the one that helps our customers to adopt different GPUs with the modular design. And this is today's topic. Look at our journey on modular design. Starting from, let's start from the MGX. We started to work with NVIDIA starting from 2022. And by 2023, we launched the very first MGX project to support J200 superchips. In 2023, We work relentlessly with Nvidia to come out with MVL72 in the record-level products and continue on that path to support the future all-bronze architecture with VRubin and also Kyber's Verubin Ultra. We still have a lot of PCIe.

Cars kind of accelerators that is needed in the enterprise environments. Start early, we have the DCMHS form factor. So we continue to do that for the 1U, 2U to support two to 4 GPU cards. If we need more, we need to do this. And then we need to go up to the 4U. And in the early next year, we also launched the MGX4U design. But we still have a lot of A-way GPU servers needed. Starting from 2023, 2022, with MBDAS MPR and also AMD's MI series GPU. module design by swapping different GPUs, different CPUs in the same architecture to support a quick turnaround on the new product launch. But we are so proud that in 2025 we also work with Nvidia to merge this product line into the MGX module design. Later on you will see more. So look at the module design and I would like to take an example of GP 300. So how we transfer from 200 to 300 is simply swap out all the group A parts including HPM, including all the networking cars and also related cabling. And we put it back on the same chassis, almost the same. We can share the tooling and faster time to markets. They can help us to meet the time to revenue more quickly. Not only on the system level, but also on the REC level. In the REC level, we use the same MGS 1.1 RAC, we use the same REC manifold for the thermal. Cooling and also the same cable culture to the back for the scale-up networking. In this way, we can minimize our generation over-generation transfer efforts, and also we can leverage the kind of module design for future generations to come. Not only that, everybody is building a G uh MVL 72.

But we also put into something that can make our products more mature and quality, better quality. In all the operations, we implement the AI to help us to increase our process efficiency by 30%. And also for the simulations, not only for the design, but also for the manufacturing. That can help us to save 50% of the turnaround time. In terms of the automations with the simulations in place, we can make sure our plane, testing, labeling, et cetera, can save a lot of labor costs up to 50%. Here we'd like to show with you videos how we put everything from system level to rec level to manufacturing floor in Omniverse before we really get into the productions. GB300NVL72, which is highly leveraged from GB200NVL72, means every successful automation practice in GB200 is directly transferred to GB300. This includes AOI, thermal pad placement, and critical screw tightening. Once trays are ready, automated lifters. And specialized filling and melting processes take over. The MGX modular design lets us immediately apply our manufacturing expertise to streamline production for the next generation of Rackscale AI solutions. So, as you can see, that everything was pre-simulated in our software with Omniverse before we reached the. Put into this on the floor to do the manufacturing. So it's crucial for us to transfer 200 to 300 to cope with all the minor changes. And this has been very helpful.

On the other hand, on the PCIe-based AI server, on your left-hand side, this is our Very first DCMHS compliant system with the Intel Zeon 6 CPU with the MFLW motherboard that can support both the 1U and 2U system. On the right hand side, again, this is the MJS4U system. So in this case, we can quickly swap between Intel AM and DC. supporting different kinds of PCI cars, including both NVIDIA and also Intel. SGX, this is the one I mentioned earlier, our own module design, starting from all the way back to NPR to Harper and also AMD's MI series product. In this case, because as a module design, we can quickly change the different CPU, different GPU, even different networking cards to support different kinds of customers' needs. With the B300 to be launched right now, we are proud to work together with a NVIDIA to support this 10-year system with air cooling. And it's also a modular tray design for current B300 GPU and future GPU and also different kinds of CPU in a box. Again, on the Bay adoptions, we also use MGX Bay, so we can support different kinds of flexibility. Not only on the air cooling side, but also we have a liquid cooling system. So in this cooling liquid cooling system, we shrink the chassis height from 10U down to 3U. So in that case, we can squeeze in the existing MVL72 GPU rack. To support the same GPU density. Both of this HGX system and also ML72GB300 can support up to 72 GPUs in one rack. And we can leverage a lot of rack-level components inside this rack.

On the very first page, I share The rapid change on the chip from the GPU or XPU that requires a lot of system design to be adopting these kind of changes. And we know that the computers for the training has been increasing quite a lot. But not only the GPU sites need to be Be dealt with, but also compute storage and also networking need to keep up with the pace. And our approach again is through the module design. So from MLW to MDNO to MSDNO, each generation we follow in, with that, we can have a very Flexible design. And I would like to take this as an example. On the left-hand side, this is MVLW. We have 1U, 2U with the same motherboard, even the same BIOS image. On the right-hand side, we have three different kinds of systems with one motherboard. The single with the single-scott motherboard. Can support 2U2NO, 2U4NO, and also the 1U10 system. And in the future generation on Gen 6, we are expanding our modelable coverage from not only x86 with Intel and AMD, but also ARM-based Neoverse V-Series ecosystem. Both of them are shown in the MSDM. Multiple form factor, and we are glad to see all these silicon vendors are adopting this as well to help us to make sure that we can quickly adopt them into a different kind of form factor for different kinds of vertical needs. So, in a nutshell, in the future, MSDO will be remaining our major model design architecture for the future. upcoming compute system.

So to conclude our how we're offering, we are not only providing the compute, storage, multi-node system, accelerator system, and also rec level projects together with age system and also some of our use systems. We will continue to utilize the module design to make sure provides the best time to market and also the best quality system. However, QCD is not only a highway company. We want to see how we can help our customers' AI journey to grow more quickly. comprehensive how we portfolios, we also want to make sure that we can provide a software-defined infrastructure with everything pre-configured, pre-validated, and also have them optimized solutions for our customers to do. And we want to work with our ISV vendors to and also ASI partners to we know we can't do this alone. So, we work with the ecosystem partner to serve our customers. However, on the AI adoptions, we all know that there are some critical pain points that customers may face that's challenging them to adopt AI. Some of them are not able to define the scope of work, and some of them are having, you know, thinking this is a high-end. Barrier and some of them feel like the development cycle is quite long. So we are offering the AI path solutions, and this is a cluster AI infrastructure with the software solutions again pre-configured, pre-validated. We want to provide a software-defined architecture that can meet the different Workloads. So, we can accelerate the time to market, time to revenue, and also embrace the open source ecosystem to provide value added on top of that.

So, my last page, I would like to conclude everything from the ground up with hardware. So, modular design can help us to deal with. Not only AI, but also the other critical parts in the AI journey. And we are so glad to work together with our critical and valuable partners like Intel, AMD, and Nvidia. On the top of that, we can support different hardware in different customer needs, including clouds. Including HPC and II, and also the telecoil environments. QCD will be continuing to support our customers with validated, optimized solutions. Again, we will provide both OSS and also partner solutions such as a MIDI and VIE on top of that. And working with ISV. We are able to support different kinds of industry workloads in different kinds of environments. And our boot is right over there in the back, A41. So, if you have any further questions, please come to us and we can have more discussions. Thank you.
