Technical Paths to the New Era of GPU-initiated Storage

Good morning and welcome. We're delighted to be with you here today with a number of our friends here. And still not up? Not sharing. I assume you'll put that up. We're going to talk a little bit about some technical paths to a new area of GPU initiatives. Storage. So I'm here with my good friend and colleague, Vikram Melthodi. He is, I think, a brilliant researcher that came from Illinois, a student of Wynne Mays, who's been driving the research side of a lot of this project. And we're working together to Basically, reinvent the GPU as something that can not only be an intense engine for compute, but also something that can really extend to data applications. And this is opening a new world, we think, in new markets and new applications. We'll talk a little bit about those. Kind of engage with you in something we also call StorageNext. There are many of our partners here today, and we'll talk a little bit about that at the end. So, and I'm CJ Newburn, and I am a data center architect and do a lot of work with IO in particular. It's kind of my job to Is to look ahead and figure out what's going to kill us in a year or two, or what we would have missed out on if we didn't pursue ardently. So, this is, we'll be talking about some new efforts that we have to kind of invent some new interfaces and new technologies that are significantly impacting the storage space. Really is driven by applications. Applications have been moving much faster than they ever have historically.

And so it's helpful to really break down and look at for each application: what are its data patterns, what are its accesses? And you can kind of put these in two camps. One on the left-hand side is compute-intensive apps. For example, the LLN. training and to a significant degree LLM inference and others on the right-hand side that are data intensive and those on the data incentive side kind of break down into two categories ones where the accesses are predictable and tend to be coarse grained and you can do them from the CPU and there's a small number of them you You don't need that much concurrency. And another that are very dynamic, you don't know until each thread goes to figure out exactly what, you know, in the last moment, what it is that you're going to access. And this is the interesting part, we think, in an emerging space for vector database search and index and predictive AI and relational graphs. And we'll talk a little bit about. More how that's driving things. So, there are really, again, two styles of compute node and storage interaction when we look at this. Those, again, that are compute-intensive, that are more the generative AI. In that case, we've been in a space where everything fits into memory. And that's a fundamental space that we've been operating in and that we're now breaking out of. We'll talk more about that. Because you mostly fit in memory and you're compute intensive, bandwidth isn't that much of a concern. It's not that perfect critical. You can use file and object related APIs to be able to get to that.

It's going after coarse grain, and this is a standard NVMe drives. And this is something that we expect to continue, not going away. It's going to be here for a long time. The NAND technology tends to use large pages and not need very many IOPS. And you're really optimizing terabytes per dollar here. On the right-hand side, It's kind of the opposite of all those things. And the key thing is that their working set sizes are just too big to fit in memory. So now they have to go out to the disk to get them. And you could bring all the data in in large chunks and then go do sparse accesses to get just a little tiny 2% that you need and throw the rest away. But if you're doing that with a pedophile, It's fundamentally inefficient. And so you want to be able to directly access data wherever it lives. And so here you're optimizing for IOPS pertissio, and you need a new approach to NAND so that every time you go to the page, you're not throwing away sort of, you know, if you need five, twelve bytes out of 32K page, you're not throwing away 63, 64 of all your data. So part of my job description is to look a year or two ahead and ask, you know, what's gonna kill us in a couple of years? What do we need to anticipate? Where do we need new technologies? And so we're seeing this disruptive trend of much larger data. Sets that won't fit in memory, and so we need to access storage like it's memory but with an API.

Crazy concurrency, like a thousand X concurrency, where the number of threads in a CPU just won't cut it, and we need to do that from a GPU directly to storage with a new programming model, and where the access grand. Patterns and granularity are fine and distributed and sparse. So we need some new SKUs that are going to be optimized for our IAPS per TCO to address that. And we're also looking at disaggregation because you can't tend to fit all the storage for our computer. A KB cache or all the IOPS in a compute node, and you may well have to go disaggregated for that. And so this is really breaking out. So there are a lot of folks that are looking, that are here, that are looking at solutions like CXL and say, well, let's just make memory a little bit bigger and make more accessible. Um I'm uh my roots are in uh computer and double engine uh uh electrical engineering. I like not making band pass filters. I like things that are open-ended so that we don't have to just have a niche like, oh, it'll be good for a little while, but pretty soon we're gonna outgrow that and then we'll need this solution. So I'd rather look forward to what it is that we need in that space. Nama, turn it over to BitCron. It's important to understand, like, okay, why many of these applications or why we are trying to create something of this sort? All of this is trending because of the emerging workloads that we are observing. And there are two types of workloads that I'm trying to show here: one is the recommendation system, and another is the vector databases.

And if you notice, already this set of workloads. Already are at terabyte scale to petabyte scale when we look into the kinds of memory footprint that is needed for executing any of these systems as of today. And it's just growing. And you can just also expand this into other applications that are also there. But the point here is trying to tell is that there are a set of applications that are already well studied, who needs like Certain amount of data set size per worker. You can categorize based on it's in training infrastructure, whether it's in inference infrastructure, or the emerging types of workloads are in the predictive AI segment, where you need much more different types of memory footprint per worker set. If you look into across this application, there are two things that. You really observe, one is the concurrency and the criticality of the data access patterns. If you are compute-bound workloads, where you have a lot of compute work to be done, like matrix multiplication kinds of operations, then storage IO does not become a prominent need for it. But if you are trying to work on a regime which is more data intensive, where you want to get A lot of data, and this data is more of like a sparse data, trying to do like a gather pattern or a scatter gather kind of like a pattern from your data sets, then you are primarily going to be combottling by the storage I/O. For these workloads, you will observe there is a lot of parallelism in the IO accesses and amount of data that you have to work with.

And for those types of Scenarios, you have like orders of 10 million plus I/O transactions at any given point of time between the two synchronization points that you're working with. That level of concurrency to handle is not possible in the typical CPU scenarios, and you need GPUs which can handle that level of concurrency at any given point of time. The best examples here are the traversal of graph neural networks. Places like in node embedding fetching or in the vector databases, trying to figure out which nodes to go and gather that sort of vector data before you do the retrieval or any of those operations. Over there, you can clearly see this behavior. Now, if you go and look into this from the storage perspective, you will, of course, ask: how do I optimize? My storage scenarios. Do I have to optimize for capacity or do I have to optimize for IOPS? Our perspective is that legacy kind of like architectures are great for optimizing capacity per dollar, but the emerging workloads need a new kind of like SKU, kind of like an architecture that is designed for fine-grained IOPS per dollar kind of scenario. The training Infrastructure, inference like KP cache offloading, they are great for capacity per dollar scenario. But the fine-grained, data-dependent, sparse scatter gather kind of like access patterns demanding in many of this type of workloads, like in the vector database and graph neural network, needs fine-grained access, which are optimized for IOS per dollar. Here is another slide.

The different workloads that I've already shown before and trying to showcase the difference between which falls under the terabyte capacity per dollar scenario or the IOS per TCO scenario. And what we are observing is that there are more and more workloads moving from capacity per dollar to the IOS per TCO or IOS per dollar segment. So, we need to optimize for those. Suja? All right. So, we want to look a little bit to see where GPUs fit in this space. So, our approach here is to take all the logic and actually do it with GPUs. GPUs are more suitable because they have more concurrency, 100,000 threads. Versus 100 threads. They have HPM. And they're also very tolerant of latency, which we're finding. So we basically have sort of three categories here of client requests. We have a user cache when we can. And we take large numbers, maybe 16 or 32K requests, that we put in a Buffer that all these threads, that many threads, contribute to. And as soon as you're done with sort of that batch and approximately that cycle, you basically send it out to the client. And in the client, you're gonna, as part of the preparation, you're gonna pick up the request from that and distribute it across. A set of NVMEs that are in your storage server. There are opportunities there. It's great to see all the vendors that we're collaborating with.

We're looking to essentially have an open ecosystem where, if a particular vendor has a way to have more communication and offer a particular feature that's That they have inside the NVMe that's going to be able to increase the performance or reduce the power or whatever else. That they can have some specialized logic that they can compile into SCADA and use that way. And then there's part of this request execution of potentially buffering rights and managing data integrity on the side. You can see that this is essentially done independent of CPUs, and the reason why is that CPUs just can't keep up. And the fundamental limitation is that of concurrency. So going to kind of talk about five S's here related to disaggregation and why it is that we may want to take Storage and not have it be necessarily in the compute node, but to move it outside of the compute node. So you're already, if you have even one drive, you have significantly more capacity and can work on a much larger problem than you could if you were trying to fit it into memory. So this is about scaling up. But as soon as you also want performance, and we'll see how close we can get with performance, of being able to get, you need many drives to be able to keep up with the IOPS for even one GPU. So you just can't fit enough drives. It could take in Gen 6, for example, nominally 100 gigabytes will show. Some data that shows it's actually more. And you'd need on the order of if you're working at a half a K, then you're talking at about 100 million, or excuse me, 200 million IOPS per GPU that you're demanding.

And that could take 30-something disks a day. So you just can't fit all that. In the side of a compute node. You're not going to get 32 drives per GPU if you have something with eight GPUs, for example. The second thing is that you may want to have, leave the compute node alone and be able to specialize a storage node and in that be able to have other forms of acceleration. That's where you're specializing. SKUs may be. You might use some storage nodes that are just the terabyte per dollar variety that you would use for a KB cache, and others that might have high IOPS. And here, also in scale, you can have pools of drives that can be allocated to the subsets of cluster nodes that need them, and they can be shared. So, that you don't have to go, it can be very onerous before you start the job to be able to shard it and figure out how to distribute the data into memory of all the respective CPUs. You can basically just keep it as a common pool that can be shared across many. And you also get the security of isolating the user process from. The DMA engine. Okay. So this leads us to essentially this interface that we have, this project we call SCADA, and that stands for Scaled Accelerated Data Access. So to summarize this, the scale is from 100K instead of 100 threads. You can do this instead of partitioning. You can automatically get your data where it needs to in GPU to GPU communication and getting down to the drives. We see that memory fabric tends to break at scale, so we can introduce an API and support errors and retries.

You can take a disk offline and bring it back in. And GPUs just can't. Going to run a file system, and there's not the concurrency in the CPU to ask the CPU for help, so you really want to make everything be initiated by the GPU. You can read directly into registers from I.O., or you can essentially buffer it a cache on the GPU. And the CPUs can't tolerate. The latency, but GPUs are very good at that. There's holds a huge amount of work, and you can switch back and forth and support little's law so that you can support a lot of latency. And we're also looking at ways that we can aggregate too many fine-grained accesses in this way. And so this really gives you now an access to an unbounded amount of storage. So that's not limited by how big your HPM or your CPU memory or your CXL or whatever. And fundamentally, by going directly to the data, to storage, and being able to get just the data that you need, you avoid the RAF problem with direct access. So the architecture looks something like this. Of you have a user's notion of an app, and in typical cases, you'll have be enabled with something like QGraph's whole graph for GNN or QVS for vector search and vector indexing. And those applications are now enabled, or whole graph is, and QVS has been. Becoming enabled with SCADA so that you can leave your application unchanged. You don't need to do that. It's just enabled infrastructure. And there's compiled into the application on the GPU client is specialized cache just for whatever your object happens to be. And that's inside the GPU. And then it makes requests to the server.

We talked about bundling those. And then it brings it back to the outside world as we need that so that we can ingress data and pass back things that are remote or shared. So we basically had these three views: the user view, a tiered view, where we have. Have total freedom to do whatever we want to, and a backing storage view. So now we'll talk about some performance results. From the performance standpoint of view, we are interested in knowing whether we can saturate the PCIe bandwidths, because that's a primary limiter. How does it trade off between the GPU and the CPU? And see what is the end-to-end result from an application. So we are not like smoking. Something else, all right? So the first question is: like, okay, what does a GPU can do in terms of performance? So the chart over here basically shows compares the Gen5 GPUs with the CPU in the same generation. And you will clearly notice that Gen5 GPU can barely do with FIO, kind of like the latest one with IO Euring. Kind of like stack, Billy can do like 43 million IOPS to 45 million IOPS and not more than that. Compared to that, what a GPU can do with nearly much lesser GPU utilization, we only do like what 24% net GPU utilization, it is not an optimized stack at all. We can already hit 96 million IOPS in the H100 generation. Now, if you look into a Gen 4 generation, which is a much more lighter GPU, which is like a L40, we are about 48 million. The reason why we disappoint million is because that's what the Gen 4 can actually support. That's a peak that you can do.

So, and even over there, We are only hitting like what, 24% to 28% of the GPU nitrogen and not more. So we already have different workloads characteristic on this. We have different patterns that we are studying already. And we are observing that it's a lot of two-ex more effective total performance that we can get just on raw NVMe IOPS. And we can add more. To over here. One of the platforms that we are enabling this segment is the AIDP. So we already recommend having a GPU in the storage box in the AIDP platform. So check that out. We also want to thank our partners. Micron has helped us evaluate some of this benchmark on an 8 terabyte Micron 9650 devices, and we are already hitting the drive max on Gen 6 drives. And we are able to scale this data point even beyond the 22 drives to 48 drives. And we are able to hit closer to 250 million IOPS in that range on the segment. You can see here the x-axis over here is the different types of SSDs with different numbers and how the y-axis changes the IOPS numbers. Feel free to reach out to us on this. The other one is the end-to-end workload. This is the whole graph use case where we are trying to do GNN training and we are using the MLPerf data set over here. Here. The most interesting part here is to understand that the GPU memory is the comparison that is being made is across three different memory hierarchies. In one place, we have all the data in the GPU memory. In the second, the CPU memory with only all data in the CPU memory where you have the node embeddings. And the third is all data is only on the NVMe.

Trying to do the comparison between the three and trying to understand whether we are able to hit or match some of those performance. Of course, if the data is already HPM bandwidth, we are going to be maximizing the GPU memory bandwidth over here. But the interesting part here is that in the memory constraint scenario, compared to the CPU comparison, we are only 20% lower in total compared to the CPU memory use case. So, how many people would have expected that you could make drives keep up with CPU memory, of being able to do that? Any show of hands? That was quite a surprise to me. So, it's pretty cool to see that. So, some of our performance takeaways is that the IOPS are limited for unlimited data size as approaching this access to CPU over PCAE. And we're still not up at HBM rates as you would if you were doing that. And your mileage is going to vary here. We have a variety. Of different access patterns. We highlight some of those. And we're looking at getting increasingly aggressive at being also asynchronous at being able to buffer inside the application so that you can queue up multiple misses per GPU thread. And so we have some, we're now engaging. With a number of folks, gonna meet with a bunch of folks in Japan, for example, and we've been engaging with some other application experts lately to look at for applications how those map onto the time so that we can see that. So, in Storage Next, we essentially have This is an effort where we're trying to define and refine the IOPS per TCO optimized SSDs.

We have a bunch of direct stakeholders in this, so it's not a spectator sport. And we're sort of trying to mature this to the point where we can bring things to a standard and looking forward to that. We have a large number of folks that are. Delightfully participating in this, and we're trying to refine these requirements and really settle on a really solid design so that we can take those to standards. And we're asking you to share with us your different applications so that we can help evaluate those and strike the right balance between storage solutions across the. Different application domains. So, thank you very much. Thank you. I'm sorry.
