Spec Updates & What Customers Care About

Okay, we're going to continue on our journey today. So, now we are going to give an update on the OCP specs, and we're going to talk about some of the things that customers care about. We have a distinct group of people here. We have Ibert over here from my Microsoft, we have Paul Kaler from HPE, Chris from Google, David Black from Dell HP. I'm sorry, I didn't even, you're gonna hit me. Rebellion. That would be Dell Technologies to you, Ross. I see. I apologize. I'm glad I'm still standing here. Just because we're so similar, that's all. Exactly. So let's start with the data center SASATA specification for 1.5. This is contributed, and you see the QR code here. It was an effort with Microsoft Meta. HPE and Dell. It covers everything you would like to know about SAS and SATA. Some of the key additions this time, telemetry. A lot of things in the data center MVME 2.5 spec have been ported to enable human-readable debug logs. So, there are mechanisms with the transports for SASA protocols. It supports SAT with the SCSI the ATA translation. They're added HTD-specific debug information, structured metrics, and they're divided into Common device metrics since it also covers SSDs that are SAS and SATA and has SSD-only metrics, HDD-only metrics. And it also added the replacements for smart attributes that the spec authored companies use. So that now we have a one-stop shop for source of truth. There are TCG configuration history logs. These are also ported from the OCP data center MBME SSD spec. I added TCG history events for debugging things. Security.

We updated the spec to be consistent with the OCP Data Center MVME specification. As you can see, from a security point of view, the medium is not the important. The important part is the security and having the features you need to ensure your data is secure. Data center NVMe SSD spec version 2.7. This is well on its way. We plan to go to the steering committee in November to get this contributed. Authors here you see are Microsoft, Meta, HP, Dell, and Google. But it's getting very close. Some of the improvements are device self-reported power, including the thresholds from TP4199. I know I saw a demo out on the floor today with it. It's a super powerful feature. The OCP smart health metrics, including QLC statistics. Form factor reporting, latency monitoring now supports human-readable logs. We saw a talk earlier today, it talked about the value of the latency monitoring in logs, and now those logs can be done in a human-readable fashion. In additional telemetry statistics, There's per-context support, so you can create a context and then have support for all that context and have it human-readably decoded. Very powerful feature. Additional air injection support for testing and some SGL clarifications to make it very clear for SGL. What's decided or what's needed? Diff support's been added in addition to DICS. And there are form factor additions. Stuff on our march, you know, there's been lots of talk about liquid cooling, and there have been things added related to that. E2 support. Management for multiple BMCs using the 2 wire support TP6035.

That's also been added into the spec. As you see, we've been very busy with 2.7. You know, I also want to call out the feedback CLA. I really want to thank everybody who signed the feedback CLA and provided lots of feedback, lots of great information, and participated in monthly sessions. If you have not signed the CLA and you want to participate in discussions with the author about the specs, go see Mike Allison and he can help. Facilitate that. It's a new process, and the spec has really benefited from this process. With that, we have a whole bunch of people here who have a lot to say. And David, you are up first. Sure. So, Dell's involvement in this area. Has always been motivated by avoiding pointless have one built for your divergence. Having an industry baseline greatly increases the likelihood that a drive just works. And that frees up the industry to invest in more productive things as opposed to doing the same thing five different ways for each of us up here on the stage. Telemetry has expanded well beyond the initial debug use case. We're interested in periodic telemetry uploads for diagnosis and prediction at scale. Oh, that might be given this conference, AI prediction at scale. And what Ross talked about as error injection has gotten generalized to event injection, where various misbehavior. Behaviors that perhaps don't manifest completely as errors get injected. The whole point here is to test host and drive responses before the drives misbehave on the production floor.

And we've done a lot of work here to move beyond just a list of things to inject to specifying how the drive behaves when the event is injected so that we know what to expect in host code. Write the host code accordingly. And with that, I'll go turn it over. Let's see who's go one, and it goes down to Paul. Cool. All right, again, Paul Kaler from Hewlett-Packard Enterprise here. I don't think any of these items here on the slide are going to surprise anyone, really. So, security has been a really Big push in 2.7, right, even in 2.6 before, really trying to get that acceleration, everyone to adopt post-quantum cryptography support. This was kind of the initial year when you started to see the preference for some of our federal government customers to want to use CNSA 2.0. Algorithms. And I think everybody's really familiar with the kind of required January 1st, 2027 date of when we're probably all expecting that we're going to start seeing RFQs that mandate this requirement. So that's really important. 2.7 will have some new requirements about dual-signed firmware, where it's really important where we want to have a single SKU. That we can sell worldwide. The US is all in on PQC. Some of the other governments in the EU are maybe not so much, and they're really looking to have both classical and PQC supported. SPDM 1.4, we of course want to be able to get that to be able to support the kind of multi-bank architecture so we can have that. Set up to be classical and PQC in the same device, and kind of depends on what host you plug it into as what you wind up getting.

This is actually, the next one is kind of a little bit of a blast from the past. I think that I talked about this a couple of years ago. And as we see a continued move away from SATA SSDs in the industry, We want to make sure that we don't create a big gap for the NVMe mainstream SSDs so that the customers who kind of have been laggards and maybe the long tails of kind of keeping these sad SSDs around really would love to move all of them to NVMe. But the power jump that exists today and the capacity jump, Winds up leaving some of these customers to say, well, yeah, I still want a 480 gig or a 960 gig SATA SSD because it's there and it's only six or seven watts. And so to have to jump to a really high-performance NVMe drive in the data center class doesn't make sense for them. So we want to make sure that kind of the industry continues to support SATA replacement class. NVMe drives so that we can get everybody moved over to NVMe and hopefully kill SATA once and for all. And the next one, NVMe sideband. This is very related. We talked about this last year. It's very related to the first bullet point on PQC. You start to see some of these signatures. If you're doing SPDM over a sideband interface, get really huge. You know, most of the PQC SIGs are more like 50x larger, but there are some algorithms that are out there that support up to like a 500x larger signature over ECDSA. So really need to move to a higher bandwidth sideband. So we've got some requirements. 2.7 to do I3C with double data rate. And then sustainability, this is great, right?

The new NVMe power reporting with the interval power measurement. So that's going to go a long way to helping our customers measure how much these drives are using and power and for sustainability reporting out. And then this last one here, it really Is a big one, right? Is power efficiency, and I think I heard someone mention it in an earlier talk today. We really need some huge innovation here, right? We can't just continue. We're in this fast treadmill between PCI Gen 6, Gen 7, Gen 8, they're coming faster than ever. And we can't really just say, well, we're just going to double the power on each of these to be able to saturate the bandwidth. Huge improvements on power performance so that we can reduce the linear power growth while still getting huge performance out of these new PCI gens. All right. Who's next? All right. There you go, Chris. I'm Chris Sable with Google. I think that's working. So we really see that OC. Storage, JSON spec, and OCP in general as enabling us to improve our quality at the scale we operate our business at. I think David mentioned this too, but one of the big challenges that we see OCP addressing is the siloing of specs, right? If each one of us up here makes our own, Dedicated, I want this, and we disagree on the timeout and how many commands I can have in flight, and various sundry million different options. We just drive the industry in multiple directions for no real benefit. And so we see the solution being the data center spec, right? And so we're all kind of working to get to.

Coordinate and put our requirements together and have our disagreements so that we can come up with a single firmware or something approximating a single firmware that we all can live with, which has a lot of benefit for all of us and the industry as a whole. So I think another challenge that we just see. Over time is preventing performance and latency issues. Yulia and Dan were up here talking about the QoS, TP, and NVMe. That's, you know, it's critical for us for providing isolation between users when we're sharing devices among multiple users. So that's something important to Google. Complex latency issues. There was a talk, we talked about the OCP latency monitoring specification, or you know, monitoring functionality. It's been there since 2.0, I think, right? But we want to see that continue to improve, right? I think we had some minor updates for the host initiated telemetry in 2.7. And we do see that needing to evolve over time as we learn and allow us to debug these issues at scale. And everybody's been talking about cooling and power, and look at cooling. And I just want to point out we still have a lot, everything pretty much. Which is still air-cooled. So we need to keep that operating, right? And then on security, I have a whole slide for this. We've been talking about the OCP lock and safe, you know, last year, multiple talks, you know, last year to this year. And I just, you know, I want to point out again, you know, security for a lot of as a customer, it's opaque.

You know, in other words, we learn about an exploit in one SSD vendor, and we just by extension have to assume they all have similar vulnerabilities, right? And so it's sort of table stakes. We need to have. An open, secure base layer assumption so that everybody can trust storage in general. And so we see that the real path to that being OCP lock with Calyptra. And so I think this year we're sort of putting a claiming victory to halfway. with lock 1.0 spec being contributed, I believe. The Clipter 2.1 is out there, or at least there's a release out there. And the host interface, TCG Opal, MEK, MPA feature set, is ready for public dissemination, right? I guess up next on this front is getting this implemented in SSDs. Thanks, Chris. You're going to have to hit the button. I think I missed. All right. I'm Myberg Osserk from Microsoft. In other fleets, our customers care about one thing really so much about reliability, because they want their workload to always run smoothly. And they really understand the hardware can fail, but they expect us to handle those failures as smoothly as possible. And uh in OCP in OCP specs, we're really contributing to uh making this possible with enhanced telemetry and panic recovery features. A system becomes really self-aware uh and resilient by design. We develop four key features within Microsoft. The first one starting with default system resiliency. The firmware search and hard hangs are the key ones that are contributing 90% of the failures in our fleet.

So we really focus on reducing this by starting from OCP one where it it was To make sure that the commands will be able to respond after the assert handling. After power cycle, the commands will be able to come back to normal state and be able to handle the IO commands successfully. And in our fleet, also, we expect not to have any sign that I'm miscompact. And as we move towards the telemetry, we start using the telemetry data area one for online telemetry collection. And we collect those telemetries hourly and also daily as well. And for the offline log collections, after the failure happens, we're able to extract these logs and use that for detection. And prediction as well. As part of the root cause analysis, we were able to use this information to point out about the firmware issues which could be hardware or firmware related, and this helps us to initiate a firmware deployment process. Besides, We also address this related with the security issues, new feature developments coming also from OCP as well, and performance and enhancements. In terms of development, these features can take up to six to nine months, including the validation, qualification, and deployment. And until that is uh be complete, we leverage the prediction capabilities. In terms of uh prediction, we start initially with developing the uh expected common issues related with crown defects and end of life. Uh and since we in that area one we really have a strong uh telemetric coverage, we're able to hand uh detect and hand prevent these issues relatively quickly.

But when it com comes to related with the PCIe uh errors, which are related with uncorrectable, fatal, mastic graded errors, uh there's uh still we are improving the telemetric coverage in these areas. And same thing with memory uncorrectable errors. So we're working on improving these attributes. When it comes to hardware and f f uh firmware malfunctions, uh in addition to d collecting the drive log uh drive logs, we're also collecting server and kernel logs uh with the uh customer workloads as well because it Depending on the customer behavior, we have different types of issues. And as with the environmental data, it's also important with the temperature and humidity that affect the hardware behavior. With giving this flow, we build an end-to-end solution. Solution, where we, after we collect these logs, we push this into a parser, and we are using in-house tool in addition to standardized MVM CLI. And then that get into our database. From our database, we break it down to two parts: one based on the expert. Rules. In the expert rules, these are more related with the static thresholds and not very complex criteria required. But in the cases now, we are not able to use static thresholds that are more complex or dynamic, adaptive issues, then we are leveraging ML models. To able to prevent the issues. Once a failure is detected with the serial number and the slot location, we push that into our detection mechanism, and that decides what is the next mitigation action. In these mitigation actions, it could be line migration or customer notification to vacate. The nodes.

And also, we may have to do a server sealing where VMs need to be rebooted. And overall, in the cases that after we do the predictions, we look at it and measure the run the no operations case. is to measure the precisions of our ML models. That helps us to really see if the failures happens when it's expected. Given this, our precision and our recalls are above 80% in our fleet. Once the nodes or the components are vacated, that causes to our stage where we run the repair flow. The repair actions are included, power cycles, firm update and doing the replacements. And in terms of for the replacements, we usually trigger the additional machine learnings for pre-allocating the spares. We also published this in the IEEE paper in the class summits and you can see also from the QR links. As we are evolving more towards on self-healing infrastructure That is helping us to predict, detect failures on live clusters, and then be able to auto-recover them. So, we are looking forward to also standardize this early fault detection and repair action as a tool as an extension to MVME-CLI. And that way, we're able to have a Come on as a share for the South Fielding fleet. Thank you. Great. Thank you guys. For Meta, a few comments. QLC, time to market matters. You know, QLC ecosystem features and needs will continue to grow. E2 capacities of 128, 256, 512. You know, time to market matters with this stuff. Liquid cooling. You know, we need to standardize E1S single-sided cold plate solutions. Solutions as soon as possible. You know, we need one SKU that cools both liquid and air.

Backwards compatibility is required. It's not nice to have, it's required. There's lots of stuff deployed in the industry today, and we need to be backwards compatible. And we need to avoid. Industry fragmentation. And overall, improvements that scale create strong value. Some examples of this are FTP. You've heard all day today about the OCP telemetry log and debug. That's time to market. It matters. Anything you want to say? Say, David, you can go ahead and make your comment. No, I'm just grinning and agreeing. Latency monitoring, once again, debug at scale. How do you debug with live traffic when you have one drive and one rack that fails every day and it's not even in the same geography? These kind of features add value. Drive self-defense. Self-reported power, you know, very much helps. It's being able to manage power and knowing what's going on and debug real time. And open source, NVMe, open source stuff, whether it's OCP, NVMe, CLI, we've heard about this a bunch of times today. SSE qualification tests, open source adds a lot of value to the entire industry. And with that, questions? We have a mic over here, we have a mic over there, we have lots of people here. Now's your chance to ask those hard questions. Okay, if there are no questions, I'm impressed. Yeah. Wow, Paul, oh, we got one. Paul, you were too impressed. I spoke too soon. Thoughts on OCP 2.8? What features do you look to be adding for next year or whenever it would come? Go ahead, guys. If you have thoughts, go ahead. Well, I mean, you know, we had to move some of the things in 2.7.

So the very first things that will be addressed are things that we kind of said we can't get that done in time for 2.7. So we've already got kind of a 2.8 spreadsheet started of things we need to get to. Um big feature-wise, I don't know that we've identified anything that's a a huge feature requirement uh change, but uh just um I think right now there's just lots of things that we didn't get around to in 2.7. That's the current list. Anybody else want to add anything? I I'll say I'm sure There's going to be QLC stuff added. What that is, I have no idea. But you learn with time. And I guess maybe the one thing would probably be there's going to be more liquid cooling stuff. We'll have figured out more things by the time 2.8 comes out. So we'll probably have a little more detail in there about liquid cooling. I think it's very, I'm sure we'll have liquid cooling stuff. That's a pretty safe statement. And there are always security changes. That adventure never stops. My question is also regarding HP requirement. CNSA 2.0, was it 2025 requirement? Well, so this year was the first year that it. Was kind of preferred if you look at the CNSA 200 FAQs, right? The older FAQ kind of had a timeline that they've sort of done away with now in favor of the January 1st, 2027 date. But they originally said that 2025 was the year that they, if you have PQC enabled, they want you to have that as the recommended. Protocol or algorithm.

So I think it was something along the lines of, you know, th this was the first year when they started saying you need to switch over to CNSA 2.0 algorithms if if possible, but it wasn't a requirement yet. So that's still 2027. Yeah, January 1st, 2027 is still when they're that's kind of their hard, you know, hard date now. And that's an example of continuing security feature. There's a little bit of walk then run going on. I mean, for Dell, we're looking at initially requiring that you do the PQC on firmware download and then actually doing it on the file. On secure boot comes along a little bit later because that requires hardware support in the controller. Next question. Earlier today, we had a presentation discussing how, when we have GPUs accessing storage, that will move from AI workloads that are memory-bound to be storage. Bounds? Is that what are your reflections inside of your own workloads? Do you see a transition to the storage-bound accesses? I'll sort of turn that around and give you sort of a storage-looking up perspective as opposed to a workload-looking-down perspective. Changes that are leading to a couple of interesting potential new class of SSDs. One is an SSD that's optimized for an enormous number of IOPS, millions, tens of millions, very, very small, 512 bytes at a time. That's one of the things I think CJs from NVIDIA was looking forward to this morning.

The other class of SSD that we think we see emerging is what I'll call a near-line SSD, a high-capacity SSD cost-optimized that's designed to take the boundary between SSDs and HDDs in memory hierarchy. Move that down a step or two to open up more opportunities for flash-based SSDs. So that wasn't the exact question you asked, but it might shed some perspective on what's going on out there. Sure. Thanks. We have another question over here. Hi. H. P. Chodipur. Where we build routers, as you know. I have a question, right? So we have been seeing cases where the SSDs are flicked and can be used in alternate devices, right? There have been instances. So is there a collaboration from TCG, TPM point of view, TPM to SSD, where you can store secret information? Rather than PPM and make it as secure as it could be in SSD? So, I don't know if I'm not sure I fully understood that question. Trusted platform module is one of the modules that sits on the routers. It is part of TCG spec, you showcased on. Considered a secured storage where it is tied to the boot up of the device. Now, we are seeing where there are instances where SSDs are flicked and can be used in any other device. You can flick it from Juniper and use it on Cisco device, for example. So, all this secret information has to be stored on TPM. Because if the information is stored on SSDs, since it is not tied to the overall device, it can be used anywhere. So, any similar feature from a security standpoint that you guys are thinking about?

Well, so, like, I mean, TCG, right, you wrap media keys, and the OCP lock functionality sort of is essentially like. Like a HSM kind of open module, right, that goes in and lets us essentially have a trusted layer for that, right? And then you bootstrap that off drive, right? You build, you link your chain of trust builds off through the storage layer back to wherever else, off machine credentials. Come from or on machine and the trust department. So I'm not sure if that answers your question, but if you saw the lock talk this morning, the notion of I have credentials and they're stored in one place is really oversimplified. There were some fairly involved flow charts that said, well, we get some credentials from here. Race credentials are here. We combine them. We run a KDF. It spits out a key. So it isn't so much a question of where do you store the credentials. There's a whole bunch of them, and they're stored everywhere. Right. Yeah. I mean, that's one of the major things that Lock enables, right? It's multi-party. So you can have the on-machine credentials, but you also need on-mm. Machine credentials to access the data. Thank you. Okay, we have another question over here. So, will customers tolerate a larger IEO beyond, say, 16K, you know, for the drive, like a 256 TV, 5 top T V? Was that an IU size question? Yeah. Yeah, I'll take a first stab at it.

I think that certainly you can obfuscate that through software-defined storage and depends on what you're doing, if it's a direct attach and the OS is doing it, or if you've got it in a storage array, you can absolutely have much larger IUs because that virtualizes all that. So the customer doesn't see what the actual IU is. And then I think that we're seeing where operating systems will slowly get to the point where they can take advantage of larger IUs and other software-defined storage stacks. So I think those will all be mechanisms that will be able to take advantage of the larger IUs for some of the near-aligned SSDs that David was talking about earlier. And certainly in storage systems where we control the entire stack, we can adapt the storage system to whatever IU makes sense. And it's quite clear that for these enormous drives, the IU sizes have to increase. your backsliddur on it. Yeah. Okay. I think that was our last question for this talk. So I want to thank you all for coming and doing this talk today. Yeah. Well, thank you, Ross. And thank you for everything you've done to organize.
