Short-reach Optical Interface Scale Connectivity for Optimized Data-movement Through Memory for AI/ML Applications

Man, that was a fantastic presentation. Maybe I don't have anything else to say. But maybe there is something to say. I don't know. You guys know all about it already. The trend is happening. We need a lot of memory, a lot of compute. We need to put them all together. But we have some challenges. Too many things to worry about. I look at the problem that Peter stated in a different viewpoint. So maybe we can connect them all together. You're familiar with the compute elements, the simple things that we expect: CPU, storage, networking. And a number of memory layers. With AIML, we see that the number of layers have grown. We need high bandwidth memory, but we cannot have it at the same time as high capacity. If we want high-capacity storage or memory, they come at a little bit of slower speed. Speed, but they do the job. Concept of scale up is important and scale out. Then moving data efficiently is a good thing to do. And if we disaggregate things, we physically disaggregate them, but we want to logically compose them. Those are the types. Of things that OCP is trying to do through a composable memory system workgroup. So you're familiar with the pyramid, you just see that there are more layers to the pyramid. And why do we need these things? Because traditional operating systems and database and search engines. Do require large memory, need to be cache-coherent, and parallel processing makes sense for them. And things like CXL are good interconnects for that. But then AIML guys are saying: hey, we come from the HPC world, we were used to distributed processing.

Don't need cache coherence to be done in hardware. We're good software guys. We know how to do that. Moving data ahead of time is alright, as long as you give us predictable latency. And then memory suppliers are building things, and they need to serve both masters. And some standardization around what memory devices are and which interfaces they have is emerging, such as CXL. So, if GPU guys don't have CXL and memory suppliers are building CXLs, well, we might require a hybrid bridge. Something that connects the two worlds together. Now, all in all, then, you're very familiar with the pyramid, the shape of the pyramid. You might be tired of it now. So, let's just change the shape of the pyramid. We would like to extend capacity for when high bandwidth is still very important. So that's a model that's a stretched pyramid. Well, is it easy? Can it be done? And can short-reach optics help with that? Okay, so if memory is important, we just take a look at attach points for memory. We are familiar with locally attached HB. CPU-attached DDR or LPDDR, and nowadays we are getting familiar with CXL-connected memory to the CPU. You go on the exhibit floor, lots of people have these kind of solutions. So, what was that hybrid that I was talking about? Well, This diagram is trying to compile all of these concepts together. You have a CPU connected to the local DDR, you have a GPU that is connected to the local HBM, the GPU is connected to the CPU using proprietary fabric, such as NVLing or XGMI or something proprietary.

But then the CPU on behalf of the GPU is doing a lot of translation. It provides access to DDR or LP DDR. It also connects to CXL world. Now, what do we do on the left-hand side in the CXL world? CXL can provide memory pooling, memory sharing. It can translate CXL to DDR or NVMe to expand memory. So on the left-hand side, we can expand memory. On the right-hand side, we are scaling out using the native interconnect of a GPU or XPU to. The fabric that they like. To do that, we use switches. Peter talked about lots of switches. This diagram shows two-ported devices, but use your imaginations. Instead of two, use N, and each one of these elements can connect to many, many more devices. So, bottom line. To the right-hand side, we have scale-up network using proprietary, perhaps, or specialized scale-up network. To the left-hand side, we have maybe standardized CXL that's coming along. Okay. Last year, I was here, and I talked about a Moonshot project called Star. Stargate. Stargate has been used that word to actually talk about companies now. But at the time, what was it? It was a Moonshot challenge. Build me a system, a supercluster of 1 million GPUs, deliver it to me at the end of the decade. and make sure it works very well, is reliable, and is performant. Similar to what JFK told us, go to the moon by the end of the decade. So how do we do that? Last time we talked about it. We start small, 16 things at a time, and then 16 of those. And then 16 of those. And then you eventually go through the pyramid, you get to one million.

As we do that, you also see that the requirement for bandwidth grows. At each layer, if we really want to go all to all, we need a lot of bandwidth. And it's very hard to do that. How do we do that? We come up with different tiers: scale-up networks, scale-out networks, different techniques. And we are engineers. We eventually get there. So, once we do that, maybe we start with a Cluster of 16 nodes, each node having 16 GPUs, and we can interconnect them all using one layer of switching. Peter talked about that. Each one of these triangles represents a node with 16 GPUs that has nine switches in it. That each port of each switch is connected to the corresponding port of another switch in another node. So they're fully connected, and doing that, going from one GPU to another GPU, we have only two hops of L1 switch to connect. So, you could do that if your switch has 64 ports, and if you have many of those put together, you eventually get to 1 million. So, to build 1 million GPU cluster, man, it takes over 1,500, 1,700 domains. Of 500 GPUs each. And it's going to use a lot of power, many switches. So, again, how do we do that? We start, for example, with a node that has 16 GPUs, and we did talk about this. Things can be copper-connected inside that node. And that's a good thing. We have certain switches, L1 switches. We have a number of GPU switches. Depending on the radix of the switch that you select, you can interconnect these. Now, the diagram is trying to show that each switch of the 9 in this diagram.

Diagram can connect to many other switches that are like it in a hierarchy of just L1s. And when we do that, you see that one GPU trying to connect to its counter. It's any other GPU, it will go through two L1 switches. So, in this model, we have two switch ops. But then, physically, it's challenging, so we need to come up with some bundling technique. And there are lots of things to do. As a matter of fact, the color coding in this diagram. That looks very much like very much like Stargate. This is a Stargate diagram. Each color shows like port from a switch that goes to another node. To a different switch. Anyway, so when we've done them all together, we have some questions for ourselves. Peter did say that, I'm repeating it. Bandwidth is very important. Fat pipes provide aggregate bandwidth, but for For all to all, we don't really need a lot of bandwidth concentrated in one area. For clusters being connected to each other, inter-switch links, we need fat pipes. But for switch to switch, for memory to switch, for CPU to switch, we need many connections. We would like them to be independent. Buses like UCIE and HBM, wide buses, but they're subdivided in smaller sub-channels. Each one are independent, each one is independent. Therefore, we can take advantage of those techniques. Once we do that, we understand multiple sub channels. If I need a lot of bandwidth, I can aggregate them using bundling, interleaving, different techniques. We need to be careful about bandwidth in and bandwidth goes in tiles and goes out tiles, egress, ingress.

And cable bundling will help us reduce the serviceability cost. Peter mentioned this. I'm repeating it a little bit. We can do a lot of things with copper. We need to be worried about trace lengths, insertion loss. If it is cable, in fact, band radius of. The cable and how large these structures are. If we go to Photonics, and that's the team we have here, we can take advantage of the fact that things can be smaller, smaller structure, denser bandwidth per millimeter, linear millimeter, or millimeters square. Area, those are good things to do. Shoreline is very important. The more ports you can get out of the edge of a die or edge of a package, the more independent pathways you can go, and the fewer switches you need. So, imagining all of those things was hard, so we needed a tool. Yesterday, we had a presentation on Super Cluster Builder, is trying to help us there. I just go through a couple of slides to get there quickly. These diagrams seem to be very similar to what Peter. Shared. You start with a number of GPUs and some local L1 switches. And through this methodology, we can imagine and then calculate the number of elements involved. A large solution space, we need to narrow it down to what makes sense. For the cost and complexity and power and reliability parameters that we want to worry about. This is an example. It is showing a view graph of similar concepts as before: 16 GPUs, 90s. Switches interconnected. And then each one of those L1 switches interconnected inside. That was the diagram earlier.

Now, all of this was done with basically a particular Radix for a switch, for example, 64 or 144. And then we can calculate the number of L1 switches that we need if that's the case. But because it is a tool, now I went wild a little bit and said, well, what if we do a little bit more? Um 32 nodes, 16 GPUs, and I don't want to have uh nine switches in my node. What if I have three of them? Well, if you have three uh uh switches, maybe the radix of that switch needs to be bigger so it can handle So, maybe the number of bundling that we do between GPUs and switches is six instead of two. So, you bundle six links together, you get more bandwidth. Bottom line: if the GPU needs throughput, we need to provide the bandwidth to it. And to do that, we want to use all of its ports. All of them need to be connected, and that's why we need high-radix switches. So 512 GPUs can be an ensemble of 96 L1 switches and 16 L2 switches. This is a diagram for introducing A second layer of switches. We can increase that. Now, if I have if I start with an L1 that has only eight GPUs, all I need is a switch with 84 ports and they're fully connected, but that's it. I cannot do any more. But if I use a 32 switches, for example, or the number of ports per switch I can change, or the number of GPUs per node I can change, and number of layers of switches, one layer or two layers, and then we can get to 4000 GPUs. And this tells me if we still keep all to all one to one ratio of bandwidth in and out, downstream and upstream, we can get to 4,000 GPUs using a switch port that has 256 ports.

not sixty-four. And those switches are available in the market. Now an L two pod, which requires L one switches and L two switches, can give us more capabilities. The number of switch hops gets to three instead of two but they And if we still use 256 port switches, we can get to 8,000 GPUs. And then we calculate the number of links, 16,000 double link kind of connections, too. So again, illustration that we cannot do these things with copper. That's why we get together here. Short-reach optics are there. Can we take advantage of that? Well, higher bit rate, higher radix of switches, more connectivity, efficient. Shoreline, pack it more closely. And we need to be careful about reliability. Bit error rates need to be low. And moving data needs to be at lower bit picojoules per bit as well. From here on Guys are optically inclined people, understand how these things work. You can come up with a collection of GPUs and CPUs in a super chip, for example. Compra connected, yes, but optically connected, another option. There are examples of these things already, a number of companies. Are working on those. So I'm going to summarize for you the way I understand things. Building a supercluster is somewhat hard, it takes a lot of things to pull together to make it work. We have some software and systems. Implications of that. We understand SMPs of the past and distributed processing of today, and the fact that we need a lot of memory to feed these throughput computing ensembles. We touched on scale-up. By this definition, scale-up means.

Using the native interconnect of the GPU without protocol translation, either connect them directly or either you go through a switch. By my definition in this context, it is still scale-up. So I can, as I showed, I can do a scale-up all the way to 8,000 GPUs. Using the same native interconnect of the GPU. That was an example. Before having to translate that, translate the protocol to go to another protocol such as RDMA, Ethernet, InfiniBand, which by this definition that is when we go to the scale out model. So, what could we learn from all of that? We can start with white buses, so we can manage the bit rate, but we need to be able to subdivide those white buses into independent channels, such as. UCIE, such as HPM, those are good examples of these buses. Once we do that, then we still need to aggregate all of those into higher bitrate because fibers are more capable of carrying data. So lower bitrates get Translated to higher bit rates, so gear ratio, multiplexing, those kind of concepts. Small sizes are key, shoreline density is very important. And then we definitely need a tool. We need to understand we have many, many choices, which one is better to help us with course alignment. Something like this super cluster builder simple tool can help us explore multiple topologies, doing complexity analysis for that, and map that one to TCO. How do you map what performance and dollar? How do you compare those? Those are fudge factors we can come up with. Any watt times three years of usage translates into dollar.

Performance, degradation because of latency, performance translates to value and dollar. We can calculate those. And material cost, number of cables, number of switches, number of chassis we have to have, those are all dollars, also. So, this is a method of comparing apples to apples with currency. Dollar is a good currency for that. So, the tool will tell us, we could interpret. Intuitively, also understand that we need to increase the number of things we connect to to reduce the number of switches. So, high-radix things, multi-ported devices and multi-ported switches. When we do all of that, then how can we help as short reach uh optical interface. Uh we can increase the connectivity. Uh we can help switches have many many many more uh ports because photonic structures are smaller, we can pack them in a denser way. And then we can help aggregate bandwidth. Things are independent, but photonic engines and multiplexer using WDM or other techniques, we can aggregate bandwidth in a small number of fibers to reduce the number of things that we have to. Worry about and service and bundle and manipulate. So you guys are here. The little things I can ask you is: please be careful of energy spent for moving data. Picojoules per bit is very important. Because people are asking for higher and higher and higher bandwidth for the throughput that they are requiring. The reliability is very important. Whatever we do still needs to be reliable, so bit error rate. Things need to be stable. If temperature goes up, we need to have. It.

If temperature goes up too much, then we cannot handle it. We need to move the heat from one place to another place. There are different techniques to do that. Again, shoreline and sizes are important. And of course, please provide these things at lower cost to you so you can price it at lower, so that the volume. Goes up. And the sooner we have it, the better it is. So maybe short-reach optics can help. You got one? Thank you, Siema. Thank you. We might have time for one question not I'll thank thank you thank you again
