Scaling OCP NIC to 1.6T and beyond for AI

Hello, everyone. I'm Hamil from Broadcom, my colleague Damien from Meta. We in OCP have been working together with number of industry partners for this OCP NIC three. specification, which Became 1.0 in 2019 and has seen significant adoption since then. So we have come a long way with that effort that started almost a decade ago. What we are going to focus today on as we are getting into this AI infrastructure scaling and then need for higher and higher bandwidth.

With what does it take to continue with this OCP-NIC development when you go to 1.6 terabits and higher? So, what I will start with is: I'll cover and go to the characteristics we see for OCP-NIC to build 1.6 terabytes. Terabit or higher speed NICs. And then Damien will go into specific proposal and what needs to be done and what are the challenges we have. So that's how we'll cover the talk. So, with that, let's just dive into it. So, let's first start with AI infrastructure. If we look from a network standpoint, You have different domains in there. So, first, if you look at within a system, you have XPUs, CPUs, and XPUs. They communicate with each other in a tightly coupled memory semantic scale-up network. These are, this is where you see different either proprietary or Ethernet.

This network. Then inside the system, you have all these components connected via some internal fabric, which is typically PCIe. And then, when you build the large scale, when you get into like 100,000, 1 million XPUs, this is where your high-bandwidth. Scale-out network comes into picture. And there are two aspects of this which will cover the front-end and the back-end piece. And this is where this talk's focuses for OCP NIC 1.6 terabit and higher. So this just orients you with that. So, first, let's start with look at the NICs in System. So, front end, this is where you get your initial data, pre-process the data, and then schedule the data to be computed on the GPUs or XPUs. And then, once that compute has started, right, the training, inference, all GPUs do is on the back end side, compute can

Communicate, compute communicate, and this is where all the collective kind of communication comes into picture. So, this is all parallel processing. That's where your scale-out network comes into picture. So, with that, let's zoom into how do we see the front-end network. So, front-end network, as I said, it's mainly used for initial processing, pre-processing, and scale-out. Scheduling. Today, 400 gig serves well, 800 gig also, and we do have OCP NIC with small form factor, tall small form factor, serves well this market. But then, as you go to next generation, we do see that this is where people will start seeing 1.6%.

Six terabit networks coming in. So that's one area we want to focus on for OCPNIC. And then we go to the back end. So on back end, the need for higher speed is always there. I mean, if you give infinite speed today, people can use it. But again, loss of So we are at 800 gig. We are seeing the GPU compute capacity increasing. The scale-out network keeps asking for more bandwidth, higher scale, higher radics. And one of the key things here is the density. So when you build NICs for this, In a system, you are packing quite a number of NICs that we have not seen before. Like today, eight NICs in a system is very common. So the bandwidth for the area that you are using and the power efficiency becomes very critical for this. And that feeds into the OCP NIC design for us.

Us. So that's the back-end piece. So front-end and back-end in this AI system is where we want to focus. And then when we look at the characteristics of this, of course, we know it's a high throughput, high-bandwidth NICs. So of course, it's going to be PCI Gen 6. Or higher speed. And then the second thing we also see is what used to be BI 16 kind of lane is no longer true. Now you're getting into either needing more lanes like BI 32 to get to 1.60 with Gen 6, or you are seeing like some multiple r endpoints being exposed.

Via like by 64 lanes. And then peer-to-peer data transfer can also happen. So, this is where the PCA lane can go all the way from 16 to 64. Network ports, we look at, it's not just a single 1.60 port. People trying to build this network, they are looking into how do you think. Take a physical connector, break out it into several ports, 2x800, 4x400, and you can think about that as a multi-plane design. And with high-switch redix, this is where you can support a large scale of GPUs. And then, of course, load balancing is happening via all this multiplication.

Multiple plane. So that's the network characteristic. And then from a connector standpoint, we are at OSFP 1112 here, but with 1.60, we are looking at OSFP 224. So those connectors need to be taken into account for design. And finally, for the connectivity, copper and optics both need to be supported by this NIC. Primary focus is going to be all Ethernet-based. So that's what we are looking into for this 1.60. Nick, with that, what I'm going to do is I'm going to hand over to Damien to go over the consideration and proposal. So let's continue in path to work.

1.6T and also beyond. So AHG is in the past. Now we are at a 1.6T, whereby we have seen some demos that they have the OSFP, 2D4G in Credo, we have demo in those areas. And what we propose here is how do we get to beyond that as well? 3.2 T, 6.4T, the solution we propose here have those capabilities. And in the near term, the back-end link, as mentioned by Hamel, is what's driving all this bandwidth needs because that is actually the weakest link in the GPU to GPU, XPU to SPU.

Complications. So, a similar challenge when we do backend, when we look through it, is there's a lot of market fragmentation in this area. There's actually four factors that are very different when we look at it, what you have today. I will show you later in the slides. When we have more performance, we need more power, and we need more power. we actually have a cooling uh challenges as well. And for backend link, there's also consideration whether we have the PCIe switch integrated or versus not. There's a lot of debate on this area. Of course, when we get more bandwidth uh we need more PCIe lanes which complicates the SR out technant such like that.

From an ecosystem perspective, what is the existing NIC form factor we have today? I kind of put it into like there's a long side attachment and a short side attachment. The long side one is PCI CAM by 16 Defactor standard. Everybody knows about that. And OCP NAIC SFF, TSFF has produced a session. And by 16, and these are the two main of it. But that, we have a lot more four factors in the 32 now. That we have the Google APEC, which contributed OCP, and we have no summary using another version on the long side. As well as we know that we have a SNEA PMM, the bytes.

And a high-speed scale use a similar one but slightly different. And one of the prominent vendors are using Byte32, but it's also slightly different. And on top of that, OCP NIC also proposed our own Byte32, the DSFF. We have some of it in the demo today as well. It kind of makes the Byte32 very A lot of form factors, they are not converging. What can we do about that? By 16 is kind of good. Even like we have two form factors, there's some server you see here both in that. But by the way, too, it's so fragmented. And then, what can we do about it? Really? Are we able to converge with Existing phone factors? Are we able to do new phone factors to commercial them? Our proposal is: how about we look one step ahead, a by 64, and then with a capability to support by 32, and also forward-looking into supporting low-voltage I/O because now there's the new process technology.

They are not friendly, voltage point three word and all those things. We should get something, a new form factor with new I/O definitions. Before we show what our proposal is, it's good to recap what are the goals of this, which is we want to have a high bandwidth, we want to have a good performance per area. Efficiency is important. We also want to have high reliability given this AI. What are the acceptable trade-offs in this? So maybe cost is one area. We can have a little bit higher cost but meet all the requirements that we want. And maybe it's a time for us to go beyond air and have more exotic liquid cooling solutions. So this is one of the proposals that we put forward uh for comment for sure. This is one of the concept. The depth of it is actually uh taking uh inspiration from PCIe Cam and then the width is basically from the signals and power we think is

required. Certainly we need feedback from the community and we can go about that. Like we have already have all our feed offline feedback there wider, actually makes sense. So we're gonna support um sixty four lanes, PHA Gen 7. The concept study is using um OSFP, but then if we go wider we can put more. We want to support 600 watt at least in this concept. And the T-Rise of the context looks good from a look at it. So, given it supported backend, we actually wanted to have some additions connectivity to the CPU if you if someone implemented a switch on it. And we do expect we want liquid cooling and then one Maybe we can give away is probably hot swap support because if you want to have hot swap, then they are we need a blind mate, a QD, and then those are also challenging in space. One other proposal we put up for here is actually a six-millimeter box keep our zone on a secondary side that allows the voltage.

Heat pipe to implement those. And last but not least, certainly the low voltage IO there. Talk about like how low is that, whether it's 1.8 volt, 1.5, 1.2, or even 1.0. We certainly want feedback from the community what is the right thing to do here. To conclude, Hemo and myself would like to Call for action and like join us in this defining this by 64 concept and join us in our SI work stream, our terminal work stream, our four-factor work stream to do all these lists here. And certainly, do visit us in our innovation village booth. We have six companies in a four.

Table, there we show servers and the liquid cooling NICs and things like that. We have yeah, I think just like Damien said, we love to have feedback. That's what we've always done with OCP NIC. So we welcome any feedback. I think we have time for one or two questions. Maybe people can go to the mic and. Questions? Okay, okay, great. It seems like we did well.
