Scale or Stall: The Case for Purpose-Built Connectivity in Open Ecosystems (Astera Labs)

Okay. Let me start over. So while we have a open standard to be able to drive these, each architecture and these are the same. Open standards needs to enable differentiation between customers, between different vendors, but still being interchangeable and interoperable. And what we're excited to announce is a collaboration to drive towards open rack innovation for AI Infrastructure 2.0.

So, if we take a look at all that connectivity, what does it take to really be able to deliver this from ground up? Where we took a look at this and said, you know what, we need to start from the ground up, even before the silicon. So, we're collaborating with the IP vendors like Cadence and Synopsys to make sure that the IP is available, it has the fundamental capability. The telemetry and diagnostics capabilities within their IP, so that everybody in the ecosystem, not just us, can have access to the best IP. Then moving to the CPU and GPU partners like AMD and ARM to make sure that the entire ecosystem actually has great quality hardware to use there. And then how do you connect all of those together? Bringing in the cable vendors, the connector vendors like Amphenol, Molex, and TE, to make sure that that infrastructure is all there and interoperable in an open ecosystem. Then, when we move beyond that, we now need manufacturing expertise. So we pulled in

Tier one ODMs, like Quanta, WeWin, Wiestron, Ingris, to be able to make sure that they can bring in their manufacturing expertise again to deliver AI open innovation. And then finally, to bring it all together, all of it needs to be managed. So when we're taking a look at that entire software stack, the BMC, the management capabilities that are needed to manage. At the compute tray, to manage the switch tray, but to also manage the entire rack, working with the BMC vendors A-speed as well as the software implementations with Inside to make sure that we can actually have open BMC approaches to being able to deliver to this vision.

So, whether it's the AIOpen Rack itself, the compute platform, the scale-up switch platform, or even the active cable back planes, bringing all of these together into one open solution. Now, when we take a look at all the next generation scale-up solutions, We're seeing three fundamental approaches to how scale-up is being implemented today. We have general-purpose interconnects that are today pretty much Ethernet-based solutions and taking Ethernet and trying to modify it, but it's really custom, it's within a single vendor. So there's not a lot of vendor diversity.

There. And that kind of traps people within a specific vendor, unfortunately. It doesn't help us get to solving the scale problem that we're discussing. How do you actually get to deploying these really quickly? You need multi-vendor. You need a healthy supply chain. The second is that you have the. These somewhat proprietary scale-ups that are based on some version of an existing standard, maybe using some Ethernet protocol stack, but modifying and creating a custom protocol on top of that, that delivers then the purpose-built aspect of what we need within scale-up. We can deliver to the performance expectations to a certain Degree, but then you're still limited within the vendor. You still have the same problem of not being able to scale, not being able to have that healthy supply chain to really be able to deploy at scale as we need and have that reliable supply chain. And the third, and this is really where we see the future, and we're working with.

With a lot of ecosystem partners to really be able to deliver to this is a solution on open standards that allows for differentiation and still being able to deliver purpose-built solutions and connectivity solutions from ourselves, but purpose-built solutions from the GPU vendors as well. Having a multi-vendor Approach so that you can deliver to the supply chain expectations. And since it's based on open standards, that initial problem is at the proliferation of so many different hardware solutions from so many different vendors. We can bring this together so that it's actually based on common RAC infrastructure.

Where you can have interchangeable pieces, where compute trays can be swapped out, switch trays can be swapped out between different vendors, and be able to then scale this and have different connectivity for 72 GP, 144, 576. UA-Link today supports up to 1,000 GPU clusters, scale-up pods. Having common AI. Infrastructure that we can all then take advantage of. So, what does it take to make UA-Link successful? At Sarah Labs, we've been working with a lot of industry partners and took a look from a ground-up approach saying, well, you start off, of course, you need a switch. That's the scale up.

You've got to connect all of these things together. Depending on the architecture, depending on how many GPUs you want to connect and how far these GPUs are, you might need some signal conditioning devices. These can sometimes sit within the switch tray. There's a lot of designs that it sits on the switch tray. Sometimes it can go over a cable back plane. The approach can be different. Depending on how large the scale-up pod needs to be. And the UALIN Consortium itself is actually working on an I/O chiplet specification so that we can have interchangeable chiplets that actually reside within the GPUs. What this does is it allows us to advance very quickly, where we can have an open market.

Of I.O. chiplets that allows not just the top end GPUs to take advantage of UA-Link, but accelerators, those custom and purpose-built XPUs and accelerators, to just have off-the-shelf I.O. chiplets that they can integrate. And what they can do then is focus on. Their value add. They can focus on delivering the best GPU or the best accelerator instead of having to worry about the transport. And just knowing that they're going to get the best latency and the best performance, the best bandwidth with UA-Link. And then again, if you're going to go connect multiple racks together, even within a scale-up.

Domain, we can actually then do active optical cables. Now, the optical approach can be different here. In this case, I'm showing pluggable modules, but we've seen a lot where CPO or co-packaged optics can be a capability there. Co-packaged copper connectivity, or even near-packaged copper connectivity for within. The rack. All of this innovation is happening today, and we're advancing it to deliver to that infrastructure 2.0. And then bringing all of that connectivity together is having the management software that's based on open standards so that we can actually configure, manage, and model.

Monitor the entire rack for the entire life cycle of the rack to make sure you can maximize the server uptime, maximize the server utilization, and get the most out of the hardware that you're deploying. But of course, even when you build it and you put it all together, Still requires a lot of work to be able to get that to deployment. And so, what we do at Astera Labs, we have a cloud-scale interop lab where we bring in all of our partners' hardware and test these at scale so that by the time it actually reaches our customers' hands, it's actually already working. It's already been tested.

As an example, for the past year, we've been doing PCA six testing with our PCA switches that we deployed last year, and lo and behold, it's actually being deployed now in the data center. Because of the pace that we can drive with having this CloudScale and Trop Lab internally within Astero Labs, and then we've even launched. This is within Taipei, since all the ODMs are there to making sure that we can work really closely with them, not just on our own hardware, but customers' platforms to be able to really get the robust connectivity that's needed. And then bringing that together with what you see on the right here is our Cosmo software suite that delivers the ability to connect.

Configure, manage, and monitor that entire rack. We have visibility to every single lane, every single cable that's connected within that entire architecture. And it doesn't matter if it's even a lane that's on our side, if it's a lane connected to the GPU, we can actually, through our devices, be able to communicate between each other. And pass telemetry information to be able to scale this. So it's not just management within the box, but management box to box, management rack to rack. That's the level of deep visibility that's required to maximize server uptime and utilization.

Now, there's a lot of open collaboration happening, obviously, within OCP, but a call for everyone to also join the other industry standard communities that are driving a lot of this innovation, whether that's within PCA-SIG, UA-Link Consortium, CXL, JDEC, and there's so much. Happening within these standards, but the key aspect is focusing on open purpose-built standards that can really deliver the performance, the low latency, so that we can deliver the best performance per watt for all of this AI infrastructure. And a lot of this, we're actually.

Showcasing today at Astero Labs, sorry, in our booth in B33 there. We have our AI open rack innovation that I discussed there with all of our partners, showing actually how this fits within an Aura V3 rack. We have a modular PC86 back plan that's showing how to do active back plan approaches. Our PCA6 fabric devices that have been tested for the past year, showcasing all the advancements we've been doing for the PCA6 ecosystem to making sure that it can actually deploy with GPUs today. We're demoing today Ethernet running at 200 gig per lane to really get ready for the scale-out connectivity for.

Ethernet, getting ready for the scale-up connectivity for UI-Link, and then running actual workloads to deliver bigger context and faster answers, faster time to resolution for using CXL memory. And then, as I said, bringing it all together with an entire management infrastructure using OpenBMC. And working with our partners at Insight to be able to deliver this entire solution. And a plug to all my colleagues who are doing presentations this week. Check out these speaking sessions as well. Chris Blackburn is going to be doing a session on the cable backplane approaches that's really.

Going to be driving the next generation of solutions. Chris Peterson, who's actually also on the board of directors for UALINK, is going to be on a panel discussing UA-Link applications and use cases. Myself and Chris are actually going to come together tomorrow to actually also discuss what we've been doing. What does it take to take UA-Link, not just from a spec, but what does it take to actually deliver it into a solution? Solution. The spec has been evolving very quickly. First spec was released in April. There's been a lot of new advances from new specs that are about to be released, but it's got to turn into reality. And we've been working on that, and you can check out a little bit more. And my colleague Avdesh is going to dive into security, especially focusing on PCIe 6 and how to deliver.

End-to-end security for a PCI 6 ecosystem. With that, I want to thank you for your time and encourage you all to continue collaboration here. And I believe I'm keeping you all for your happy hour, so I think I'll call it here. But I will be available later if you have any questions. Questions. Thank you for your time.
