SONiC's Scale-up AI Cluster approach

Hi everyone. So so today the this is probably the third uh the topic talking about uh the AI. But this time we're talking about uh like the scale up. So we have the scale up working group uh set established. So, today we like me and Riff will give an introduction to see what we do in the scale of working group and what we want to do. So, this slide I got from the Mihaq. I give credit for the Broadcom team. So, basically, to show you, like, say, physically, what they look like, because we're talking about the scale.

Up or scale out, then what physically looks like. So, today, as of today, probably the scale up we consider it within the rack. But this will be changing. Because the moment, like because we have all the cop cables, today, because they scale up in the rack, it becomes the cop cables. We solve the COP cable, we introduce the optical cable, we can go even further. Scale out is basically now we have even scale out and scale across. Basically, like I say, like just mentioned the Microsoft SRV6 data center, that's a huge one. So that's a fun physically.

The two differences. Then this is from the requirement point of view. So a lot of people were thinking like from a scale up point of view, they're thinking that, hey, I extend from the server. So it should be considered a server. That's a wrong perception. I will go detail in there, but I wanted to say looking at the job scheduling point of view. No matter scale up and scale out, they are the same. So from scale up point of view, from the user point of view, they just thinking each compute tree within the rack is still independent. So they are not considered the whole rack as basically one server.

So that's a wrong exception. So that's why I like to say this time I'm glad that on the first day we have the e-sum showed up. That boosts a really good momentum to say, hey, now we want to converge from the transport point of view. Because a lot of people are thinking, hey, I can extend the CXL or the PCIe, whatever the bug. In there, but in reality, this is not the server. It is a cluster, it's a system. So it's a digital system. So you need handling all the HA stuff there. Then I use one example. This is come from this year, early this year.

The DeepSeek has one paper published. And I using one example, they basically compare the scale up and scale out from the token per second generation point of view. So they basically say, hey, I have the same amount of workload. Then, if I go in on the scale out, which is the IB network, which is 400. Gigabit per second. So they can get six seven tokens per second. Then, but if we scale up, he's using the ML72 as one example. Then they say, hey, now I can get close to 1,000, very easily to extend it. So then you see that the difference. So from the user perspective, The scale up, one thing is the bandwidth. Because the more bandwidth, you can move in more data, then you could get more token per second, those rate. So that's one big advantage. That's why everybody is high on that, because your inference eventually will be built on top of those speed. Because you don't want to, like I say, I'm waiting for that forever. So that's the main thing. So then, why we come up with this working group? So, this is the working group. Today, this is the second time I joined discussing the working group. I joined in the morning talking about the routing working group. This is scalp. Basically, this is like last year, Gohan and I had a talk. I got a requirement to say.

They build up an Ethernet scale. He also get a similar requirement. So we say we want to build it together because on the Sonic. And then we will get the TF1 from the Broadcom and another GPU vendor. So right now they don't want to go public to announce it. So I'll let them to announce it. Yeah. Of us initially wanted to build it. But the question is how we make the meeting. The moment we four of them want to collapse together, if we sign, because each of them has an NDA to each other. But if four people come together, you need a four-way NDA, which is terrible. So that's why we come to the Working group. We say, hey, we want to build up this working group and to basically promote the community. That's why we say that's easy. Under the Sonic Working Group, at least we can discuss. We don't need a sign NDA to discuss it. So that's the main purpose. Buha and I will say, hey, we started this working group. Now we have closer 100 people.

And we do the weekly meetings and we d want general momentum to see because uh I would forecast like uh this year we don't see we only see the chassis, right? Next year in OCP, I bet there will be the real scale up Ethernet based uh chassis will be sitting there. So let's do the bet. On that. Okay. So we start with Microsoft and Alibaba. So on this August 9th, both Gohan and I was in Beijing, China. Then we started to invite Tencent and Biden. So four of the CSPs joined for this one. So you see that this.

Requirement comes from the four S CSPs coming together. So it's kind of real. Yeah. And the other one is like, say, the moment we get the four S CSPs join, the other like CS GPU vendors and IODI vendors, they all join. So it will be very interesting to see. Because initially, Goha and I both are the network guys. We talk in the same language. Now we see the different topic coming in this working group. So then you can see that because this is the whole, because for scale-up, the difficulty is like this is a whole system. So there are a lot of things that you need to work with the compute to get together.

So it's not a network only work. So that's why you need to make sure that when you design it, everybody to be agree and participate to work on it. And otherwise, like say, to be honest, from my point of view, scale up will be populated more in China than in the US. Because the Trump banned the s the GPU, right? Which gives the good like um opportunity in from market point of view. There's no competition. Whatever you build, they're using it. Then you can have time to iterate. Because like when I talked to Lee Hua from Microsoft, they say, I need to compete with the MVL72 because otherwise Microsoft compute guy won't be using it. I don't have this problem. So that's what the Trump will give the market to China. Okay.

Using this one as an example to showing how diversity of this network will be. So the first one is a local China GPU vendors. Then we have Tencent talking about the semantic layer, transport layers. So in here. So you see that it's already beyond the network guys. Then we have a talking about the LDP recently. Then we also had a UniVista. That's a very interesting guy. This is the startup talk uh creating the IO die, the IP, which give it to the vendors. And the funny thing is like they already get the TF one, do the integration.

In China now. They get they get it from Tencent. So I talked to the Guohan to say, Among four of us, Tencen might be the first guy to get the real product. Because they already so now I give my TH5 because I this year I delayed, so I won't be able to get uh power on the TH5 and the TF one. So I use the TH5. You guys testing with that. So then later on, they can compare with the TF1 and TH5. Then, following, we just talk about at this moment, we only have one rack, right? So, we have JPIN talking about UMP next week, which is talking about how we extend from one rack to the multiple racks. And we also have Tencent and P1.

From Ten Center, talking about what's the 10 Center view to change it from the copper to the fiber. So, which means that we want to go beyond one rack. Next. Okay, so now I start talking about from the Alibaba point of view. So, this working group starts from the initially to say, we're talking, what do we want? Because we want to build it, right? So we want to talk about. So the first one is like from an application point of view, it'll always be a large packet. Gohan and I kind of agree: say no HPC. We don't want to deal with that beast. Only the AI traffic. The AI traffic that's live is simple, then only the large packet will be getting involved.

We probably go in with five, initially 64, because in China they say, even you do 32, it's good enough, because you beat everybody. But we probably start with 64, then we go gradually move up. Yeah. Then from the chip point of view, we need a high bandwidth because the deep segment already expanded. That means your token per second goes high. So you have to have that. We say the low end-to-end latency. That one, I don't have a good visibility. How low will be. So that's why we say just a low latency. Yeah, so that's why I want to wait for the testing result to compare into that. Then the other one, We need a multi-tendency because natively we are the cloud providers. So we have to have the multi-tenancy support and the enhance the visibility because otherwise the debugging is terrible. Then we want the air cooling, liquid cooling. So that's from my side. The next. Riff, you wanna go with Microsoft? I don't want to hijack Microsoft requirement.

And please pardon me for like maybe 10 seconds. I will fix that notification. I'll come back already. Yeah, don't don't want to interrupt what Eddie was talking. All right, all right. Yeah, uh thanks a lot everyone. So uh basically from uh Microsoft point view at least from what we see is that uh first of all is the packet size from Application point of view, we don't really see much need for the small packets. The packets can be batched, so it's still fairly large packets, as you can see here. Then the latency is also another interesting thing. We saw in the scale-up network, low latency is almost an absolute must, but it turns out.

Be not ready. So right now isn't less than 1 microsecond, and preferably like 600 nautosecond is probably already good enough. So the traffic rate is another thing. We need a huge amount of traffic, like bandwise. So ideally, it's at the total. Bandwise of the GPU can match with HPM bandwise, which is actually quite a stress. So also another thing is multi-tenant. So we do have use cases for multi-tenant, which is actually at the GPU or node level. I don't see anything come up yet that goes.

Within GPU, then splits the GPU into multiple partitions. Hardware-wise, we have like liquid cooling or copper. One small thing is that we do have seen the requirement for the M-1 service interoperability. The reason is that you may. have like multiple different hardwares being developed in a in you know in parallel, the switches and GPUs are developed in parallel. So you could end up with an early stage of verification which where you use old generation and connect with the latest generation on the other side. So MS1 different will help with that.

Uh network proto-white, um L2, you know, everyone is doing that. Uh but we uh we do see like people because uh thinking from the you know the packet side point of view and latency point of view, uh maybe L3 is also an option, so we don't wanna rule out that from the table. Uh and with L3 of course, PFC, uh ECN, all these things will just be there. Uh even in the L2, PFC is also doable as well. So operational wise, uh you know monitoring is definitely something key that we need to think about. Uh one thing for the monitoring is that the hybrid supports definitely will add um you know a lot of overhead uh on the counter pooling.

Uh so we do see like high CPU usage on many different components in the system. So um you know this may cause a problem and needs to be fine tuned. Uh high frequency telemetry uh we just already talked about. Yes, then it will definitely help debugging um you know the AI traffic. All right, so that's everything. Yes, thanks. I'll go get it back to Eddie. Go next. Yeah. So after like Gohan, I invited Tencent and the ByDance to join. So we also get the Tencent requirement and ByDance requirement. So this is the Tencent requirement. So you see that they start with more like 32. Actually, very real. And there are 64.

GPU part is uh like a two node, two rack, back to back. So very unique. So it's good like do we see the different view on that. Then also they want to go and eventually go to five twelve, which is they call the the Ethernet Attra ultra, which is also the optical uh approach. Then they sound want uh like the one microsecond. I forgot They are the round triple one micro or this is a like a like say one way one micro. But uh we have recording on that. The packet side also like I say this is a four K um packet side. So they introducing two m things. One the memory semantic or which kinda like uh RDMA like this approach which you do the copy the the data.

The other one is a five twelve byte, which is they call it memory semantic, which is a load install, which is traumatic, like you go with uh AXI bus to get uh instructions and do packaging there. From forwarding point of view, they also say one of the like say IP routing and also they were preferred to using the compression headers. And the congestion is kind of similar. So I won't go the interesting part for the working as a server. So that's it from operational point of view. Because you think about this i it although we say, hey, you're using it individually, but from the configuration point of view, you want to be as static as possible. So they were working as a server. So Means that you don't want to touch net as much as possible, right? So leave it as long. So that's one. Yeah. Then we come with the next. Then we come with the Biden. So the Bidences start with 128. Actually, they also talk about 32.

And 64. It's very interesting. Both companies are talking about the same things. I asked them individually. I would say, were you guys talking to each other? Because they also have the 32 with one rack and 64 by two rack by back-to-back connected. But they say they come up individually. They didn't talk to each other. But they want to like go into the one twenty eight or one K eventually. So packet size also is a big and latency wising the they cla I one of them claims one way, one of them claims two way. I forgot which one is uh they're also asking for the multi-tenancy because of cloud uh requirement. From then the other one kinda similar.

So now we see that we have four of them. So we put them together. So then this is the table which is already in the architecture document. This is the open. You don't need to take the picture. This is in our architecture document. So you see that once you put all four of them, you put it, then looking horizontally, you see that. the commonality in between. So that's the main purpose. So we want to draw every the table. So now everybody will be clear, say what's the commonality in between, right? So you see that from packet size point of view, kinda similar, the big packet, right, one K at least minimum. Then the cluster size, everybody start from small and then going to up to one K.

Probably Google guys go even further to the AK or 9K for the OCS. But I think here on the Ethernet, everybody maybe hesitated to go that high. But at least we will go with one rack, then multiple racks, to go in further on the top of it. Latency-wising, I think everybody just says low. How low will be it's need to test it, right? So then from the traffic rate kinda similar basically say we need to meet the the memory bandwidth. That's the basic stuff. Then multi-tenancy is kinda same, so everybody's the same. Forwarding, you say layer two, layer three, tha like uh Microsoft one to layer three, I'm fine with that also. So Eventually, it's just forwarding, right? Then, from an operational point of view, I think the monitoring is a key. So, everybody talking about the monitoring. And so, it kind of likes it because you don't want to get another beast. It's hard to manage in your network. So, simple, reliable, the power.

Will be the key. Okay, then next I will probably give to the riff to talking about our architecture part. Yeah, all right. Thanks a lot, Eddie. Okay, so basically, with all the requirements and coming from the community, we come up with this Ethernet scale-up AI cluster architecture. I think right now the the screenshot is a little bit older. Right now it's a version 0.6 should be uh and uh it's actually published already in the GitHub. Uh so if anyone's interested in uh feel free to check it out. Uh give us comments, feedbacks, then we really appreciate it. Okay. So uh when people are talking about like AI network I think uh one name will definite Pop up with the UEC. So, what's the difference between those two groups? And what's the focus? So, I think on the UEC side, huge congrats on the 1.0 release. UEC currently is mostly focusing on the scale-out side of the network, while we are mostly focusing on the scale-up side of the network as the purple side.

And the red shows highlights over there. So the characteristics is slightly different or very different. So that's why I like actually focusing on different things. Okay, so and I think in the beginning of the architecture talk, it's actually the reference system model, how things get modeled. So basically, on the very top level, all the GPUs will be interconnected to each other within the single domain. And then inside Inside of each GPU, we can see each GPU will have all the multiple stations inside, and each station will actually have a unique address, can be actually identify every single station. So each station can be further broken down into multiple ports that can be connected to.

Through multiple links, multiple uplinks to different switches. And all the network you can see is commonly, currently in a single-tier, single-cop network that limits the latencies and other things. And I think some people may think about expanding the scale-up network. Into the multiple layers or multiple hops, but right now we'll start with a single hop, single tier network at this moment. Okay, so one key thing is that or drives the design is actually the bandwidth. The bandwidth is a lot of requirements is to actually match the GPU.

Memory bandwise then goes to how much the HPM can do. So the current is and the previous version is actually the HPM3E, and now everyone's moving towards HPM4. And we can actually do a really quick calculation. In order to actually support this bandwise, each GPU will need a huge amount. Of ports being created, and that creates a lot of challenges in the system design, which we'll talk about slightly later. All right, and then you know, the entire system can be connected using copper, and we're expanding to the optics as well. It's really like this gives us a flexibility going beyond one single rack, okay.

Another thing, we just talked about the multiple uplinks. So different people use different multiple uplinks maybe for different reasons. So some people may think that they use it for load balancing. Some use cases may think that they actually use it for reliability. But keep one thing in mind. With multiple uplinks, is that the memory is very bandwise hungry. Okay, so when you have multiple bandwidth, you better use them fairly wisely. Okay, and then it goes to the last item: we do support various ways, or we do see various ways for the failure handling, different company or different.

Like the, you know, it's actually doing different things. And so, yeah, there's no single single bullet for the failure handling purpose. All right. Okay. And we just talked about how many ports we need to fill in the HPM. Okay. And how many ports do we have? Have in one single ASIC. So we already talked about like the, you know, right now it's 512 radius. So at maximum one single ASIC right now is 512 ports. And with this, like one single GPU, that needs like 21 or even more ports. So how do we solve that? So very gladly, you know.

In the Sonic already has a multi-ASIC architecture, and it is commonly used in the T2 chassis. We can actually do similar things to actually solve this problem. So, you might also wonder: can I just shovel more switches into the rack? Probably okay, but you know, the more switches you put in, the less rack space you can use, you can actually put there for GPUs. So, rack space is limited, so that may not be also a nice choice. And there you go, multi-ASIC. So, with that, every single ASIC will have its own protocol stack and control stack.

Stack, for example, SWSS, SYNCD, SI, and with all the LDP, all these product stacks as well. So with that, different ASICs can be programmed like differently, then enable us to actually put more ASICs within a single switch than saves the rack space. So, this is something like we probably need in a scale of network. All right. And now, let's talk about a little bit more on the prototype. Okay, so this topic may be slightly large, but we'll start from the transaction. Everything starts from the transaction. So, is all the RDMA really? And writes and everything. Then, from that, we go to the transport, which packs all the requests into the packets that can be sent out, or the requests can be sent out. And then, from there, we go to the adaptation layer, which actually provides, for example, that's where, you know.

The plan lookup and everything actually starts to happen. So it determines the packets already in the buffer and can be which lamps or which paths it should be sending out. And that's adaptation layer. And this is very likely the very first layer we'll. Probably have something in it, and because the adaptation layer works with the network layer to see which link is actually alive or good. And that involves, for example, link probing, for example, PFD, and these things will happen in a layer. All right. So going to the next one, once you knows which plane it goes out, it goes to the network layer. So network layer does all the forwarding, it determines which GPU it actually needs to go to, it packs the p uh packs a packet and everything. And uh in here um you can see we have the um not just the you know the regular L2 um forwarding, we also have the optimized header.

We are talking about very soon is a different or dedicated protocol that can be leveraged in the AI scale up network. So, once the packet gets created, it will go through the Ethernet layers and link layers. Eventually, the packet goes out. On the Ethernet Mac layer, we can see. the LDP were actually being used over there. So the the entire network is somewhat static. So you might not really need LDP for neighbor discovery. But here the LDP will actually be there in order to actually help the for example link level retries and you know CBFC to actually get established.

So on the link layer, we also do support like PFC. And once the packet goes out and actually does you know hits the file layer, we do expect auto-negotiation, link training, and also FAC being enabled. That just gives you like better link reliability. Otherwise, you hit bit errors and that's just not fun. Alright, so that's the whole product stack. And we just talk about the headers and optimized headers or compressed headers. So on the top is actually the Very standard, you know, the L2 layer headers, as you can see over there. Uh however, in uh we um uh we do see um uh some of the requirements that actually needs uh small packages. Uh for example in the Tencent um they they have like CPU to remote GPU memory access.

Those packets can be as small as 128 bytes. So with that, the size of the MAC header is actually becoming fairly noticeable if you actually transfer a lot of small packets. So in this case, we can actually use a compressed header. Which reduces the packet size from 18 bytes as it shows up out there to 14 bytes with everything being placed inside. So the destination and the source, those B's, there are two bytes for them.

enough to um you know cover the other use cases right now. So this is this is very uh very helpful. It's gonna be very helpful. Okay, so that's uh uh oh sorry. Uh forgot to mention that uh yeah the the the packet format uh the header is called uh AI fabric header is actually being defined in the SUE. So if you are interested in that, feel free to check it out. Uh there is a huge spec uh you know talking about uh all the details over there, uh including all the pipelines and everything. All right. Yes, thanks. Okay. So uh uh the next one is actually the configurations. Um we mentioned that the network is pretty much uh you know majority static.

So, uh but still needs a control plan to program it. Uh so in this case uh we can actually have uh you know a STEM controller uh programs everything like into the into the uh into the switch and make sure everything works. So, we do we do need uh uh several protocols being enabled but it's fairly minimum, um for example like LT. or BFD or other type of like link probing, but this is pretty much the protocols that we need. Okay. So now where where are we? All right. So uh the whole the whole working group, like all the effort starting from the January and then it actually gets kicked off from uh you know at March.

Um we are currently at the architecture version 0.7, which is slightly behind the schedule. Um however uh you know um that means that uh we are we are still working working towards that and if everyone or anyone is actually interested in that uh uh feel free to join us and after then we'll once the architecture doc is finalized we'll go into the model designs and all the side API defin uh definitions other things. So this is the whole like the you know at a high level where are we? Okay. Okay. So yeah. So last one, call for action.

Uh if you're interested in the whole um you know in a you know um whole effort, um feel free to join the uh scale up n uh scale up working group uh and the weekly discussion um we have a weekly discussion meeting. Uh the link is actually in the you know um working group home page. It's quite a long link, so I'm not going to paste through here. But another thing is that the architecture doc is actually out for review. So share your feedback, let us know how things go, what you think. It will be really appreciated. All right. So that's everything. Yes. Thanks everyone.

Questions? Thank you, Eddie. And thank you. Any questions for the speakers? I have a question for them. Yeah, so I wanted to, Mike Cap, you want to understand. How you mentioned ESUN. How does ESUN fit in there? Is that where you guys are headed? We're using that at the lower layers? Yeah, that's a good question. First of all, I like the ESUN name better than the SUE. SUE, I feel like we are going to the lawsuit very soon. So, ESUN.

One basically say like you can think about like he mentioned like the Ethernet headers, right? Anything below is Ethernet, right? So that's what we're doing right now. And above it, it's end-to-end, which you could do like UL, you could do the UEC, whatever it is, right? So, this is end-to-end because, from my point of view, like say end-to-end is more like driven by the GPU vendors. It's very hard to convince everybody to agree on the same thing because there's no interoperability really required. But for me, at least, I need to make sure that all Everybody going with the Ethernet, we're talking about the same thing. See, just like Riff mentioned, we have the CPFC, we have a PFC using the control to the flow control. Then you're using the LR, those things. Those are the basic stuff there. So that's the main thing. So, from my point of view, ESAN is basically aligned together.

Part, but Isao House will have a hardware part. That's the main difference. Yeah. Yeah, so thank you for the working group archive. Actually, I watch all of them and it helps understanding the requirements. It took like three days, by the way. And one question about. Configuration model. So at least for initially, I believe that all the switches would not be connected together, at least at the data path. And you mentioned about the multi-switch ASIC feature.

And also the SDN kind of API. So, do you expect for the one-layer initial setup to use also use this multi-ASIC feature, or it's only for two or more layer features? Repeat the last part of the question. Yeah, so do you expect that even for the initial single layer, you could use multi-ASIC feature, which even with a single layer, like in the very beginning, like single-hop, single-tier network, the multi-ASIC.

Will actually be very helpful as well. Because if you think about the MVL, let's say MVL 72, right? So NANDRAC has 72 GPUs interconnected with each other. So each GPU will actually have a lot of ports. So if you do some calculations, a single ASIC is not going to actually support that. So that's where, like, You also don't want to really shovel in more switches because then you reduce the number of GPUs you can actually put in the rack, and then it creates a problem with you have to connect the multiple racks, then copper would not work. So then that's the case that the single switch with multiple A.

ASICs inside will definitely help to fix that problem. So do you expect which would be used more or? I would expect the multi-ASIC will be used more, not just the single ASIC. Yes, yes, because the space is limited. Thank you. No problem. All right, if no more questions, we'll take one last break before the last set of s sessions. Let's all come back at 2.10.
