Panel: Hardware Fault Management Progress Towards Reliability at Scale

All right. Let's get this started. Wait for this a little bit. Good morning, everyone. Come to the session Hardware Fault Management: Progress Towards Reliability at Scale, where we'll talk about three of the hardware fault management work streams. My name is Yogesh Verma, and I lead all the three.

Work streams that we are a co-lead all the three work streams that we're going to talk about today. This is not really a panel-style discussion, but following me, our presenters would be Drew Walton from Microsoft, Vilas Sridharan from AMD, Carlos Valin also from Microsoft, Shubhida Pugaukar from. Intel and Anil Agrawal from Meta. So, before we get into the work stream activities and updates, I'd like to give a brief overview of silicon and data center reliability initiatives and what the future looks like.

at OCP. So there are many facets of hardware fault management, but to be truly effective in today's AI scale mega fleets, there needs to be a set of common attributes. For example, heterogeneity in terms of silicon and vendor agnosticness. Standardization of logging needs to be there. There needs to be scalability. There needs to be the fleet level discoverability, observability, testability.

You know, configurability, debuggability, and serviceability. And there also needs to be in-flight Rust feature rollout. And all of that needs to happen, you know, needs to be supported in both in-band and out-of-band manner. So our approach at hardware fault management. Is to kind of define this basic building blocks in terms of, you know, basic building blocks for a standard framework in terms of, you know, the error classification, logging formats, signaling interfaces, error handling actions, and configuration. So think of those as.

Like the shorelines for jigsaw puzzle tiles. And then we have this synergistic OCP activities, for example, CPU and GPU system in RAS and manageability, and fault detection or mitigation, also known commonly as SDC workstream, debug and diagnosis. And fleet memory. And all these initiatives or work streams are basically expected to adopt and extend these building blocks to their use cases. And thus, they naturally fit. So in the future, We expect OCP to deliver a standard end-to-end data center reliability framework. And I'm happy to share that industry is aligning pretty rapidly behind all these initiatives that we are taking. This is just a partial list of who is either participating or looking at us.

And this is growing at a pretty fast pace. And now, getting to today's agenda, we'll have these three work streams that we'll talk about. So, first off, you know, hardware fault management, which basically creates this Jigsaw Puzzle tiles or the sh shoreline for them by, you know. standardizing um you know common knowledge base of fundamentals uh like uh the ones I listed before. The second one is uh you know fleet uh memory uh fault management, which uh extends the application or application of hardware fault management framework to memory technologies such as DDR, uh HBM, LPM.

DDR and so on. And it defines the building blocks or extends the building blocks for memory use cases. And this hardware fault management meets every Friday. Fleet memory meets every alternate Tuesdays. And finally, we have RAS API, which defines a standardized abstraction interface between. In the fleet nodes or hardware and the RAS management or fleet control plane software. And that is a CLA work stream that meets every Wednesday. So, with that overview, I'll invite my colleague at OCP, Vilas Sridharan.

to get us started on RAS API workstream. Thanks, Yurgesh. So let me I want to talk a little bit about RAS API and let me start by just articulating the problem that this workstream wants to solve. So, you know, every component that's put into a data center can fail or can take errors. And right now, every component vendor reports those things in a vendor-specific way. And that's not desirable, it's not scalable, and there's not really a value add for the component vendor in having our own proponents.

Proprietary sort of format, data formats, and pipeline to the data center. So the goal of this work stream is to standardize that so that the piping, the infrastructure between the component and the data center is standard. So from a component vendor point of view, we know what we can implement from a data. The center point of view, doesn't really matter which vendor's component they're talking to. They get the error logs and RAS information in a standard way. So that's kind of the goal of the RAS API workstream. So it's been going on for a couple of years. There have been some major updates from last year.

So I think, actually, before I talk to the slide, I think the big thing that we're doing is we're defining this in an abstract manner. So I think there were some starting points where this became very kind of device specific or specific to certain protocols. Here to get to the first version, the next version of the spec is to have a very abstract specification that can then be bound to various different underlying protocols like Redfish or PLDM or whatever, right? And so the sort of abstract commands are going to be common, right? The binding then would be one binding per.

Sort of protocol or transport. And so what we're doing right now is working on the sort of abstract commands and data structures. So this terminology, we would have an agent, an endpoint, and an initiator. So an agent is just an entity that speaks RAS API. An initiator, as it sounds, initiates requests, an endpoint responds. The endpoint will expose capabilities, so it can be discovered, configured, and then it has sets of cues for reporting errors and a set of cues for receiving actions. So one of the key things that we do is repair actions, those kinds of things can be sent through this, right? And then a second part of this, and Shibada will talk more about this on the next slide, is we don't currently in the industry have a standardized data structure that can be used for actions. So for errors, the SEEPR is defined by UFI, and that's a pretty common thing that's in wide use.

There's no equivalent way for the data center to provide a standard format and say, hey, you know, component, take this action. And so, what we're doing is defining a common, what we're calling a common platform action descriptor, which is Seeper-like, but it's a standard format for actions, and it'll have some standard actions. Actions, it'll have vendor-specific actions. And so it's just a data center that's a data structure that can then just be piped through the data center without the data center needing to understand the details. So I think that's a big thing, and Shibata will talk more about the details of that. Like I said, the plan here is to use CPERS, which is an.

Existing data structure for error records, and then the CPADs for actions. And so, this was a major update from last year. So, we're working through getting a 0.85 version of the spec out, I think we're calling it. And our goal is to have that be sufficient to start implementation on a proof of. Concept and then work towards a 1.0 that'll be a full-fledged thing. So, to talk more about the CPADs, I'll bring Shibara up here.

Right, so as Vilas mentioned, we define Common Platform Action Descriptor, which is a new data structure for platform actions. And it follows the same CPR format that's in UFI spec. So if you look at the right side, the format that's there, it's off of the UFE spec, which will have a record header, it has section descriptor, section body, which describes the error records today, right? So we use that section body to describe the action. So it supports standardized as well as vendor-specific actions as Vilas just.

Mentioned, there have been standardized memory error records formats or processor error record formats. So, similarly, we could have those or vendor-specific actions, like some memory actions like PPR and so on. So, those are described in the section body. It is sent as a payload with action execution commands. So it travels with the command, and then a RAS API endpoint would take action on it. The difference between the two, the CPAR and the CPAD, is that we have the same fields, but to fit The actions, we have changed the severity fields to urgency and confidence. So urgency meaning that you whether you need to take the action immediately or not, and then confidence, like with how much confidence can you take this action right away or not.

And then the next big change is changing section type field from the CPUR to Action ID. So Action ID basically helps the vendor. It's for the vendor to take the action on. It's a global ID. Will help the hyperscalers also to uniquely define which actions they want to take. So that's about CPR. And I'll go to the next slide. So two data structures: CPR, CPAD, and we need commands for them to be exchanged.

Here, we don't have the commands. I have just the table of like what are the categories of commands that we are defining. So, there's endpoint-related commands. So, information, the function of that is basically to discover, retrieve, and modify the RAS API endpoints. You can configure all the capabilities. Capabilities or and discover the capabilities of the endpoint. The next category of commands is error and event queue management. So that would basically allow you to retrieve and modify the error and event Configuration, it would allow you to retrieve the error data. So it's the seeper records. Once you do a command to retrieve, say, get errors, that's going to send all of the seepers to the initiator, RAS API initiator.

Along with that, you can also configure the endpoint for queues and so on. Uh the last category is uh action queue management. So it is to uh retrieve and modify the uh action queue configuration and uh you can send the action execution command um uh Along with the CPAD, to get the action done on the endpoint side. So with this command, basically the CPAD travels with this command, and then the endpoint will perform the action. Again, you can also configure with set get commands and so on.

Um so these are the set of commands that we are defining. So that pretty much completes the um minimum required um set of um information that you need for um RAS API definition. And I'll call upon Carlos to describe how we will use this. For proof of concept. Yeah. There you go. Thanks, Roberto. All right, so the RAS API proposes this set of standardized data structures and commands, but how do you use them in practice in the data center? And that's the Question we want to help answer with this proof of concept. So, we're going to focus on Adaban first, and the goal is to demonstrate that the RAS API direction that we have allows for demonstrating a full round trip going from error generation, error record generation, to action requests back into the device that generated that error.

And via the out-of-band protocols and stack that are typically found in a data center. So, the diagram on your right is going to show high-level components that we'll use for this proof of concept. We'll have a BMC that's running the OpenBMC stack. It implements new Redfish URIs that are going to expose the RAS API abstraction implementation. To the BMC. Then you'll have a simple reference client that'll act as the IdaBand RAS API initiator that can do gets and posts to those URIs in the Refuge server in the BMC. And that Refuse client can also interact with a simple analyzer that takes CPERS and inputs and then recommends actions and It's corresponding, it produces corresponding CPAD as a payload. On the diagram on the left, now you can see the high-level flow diagram. It starts with the Redfist client issuing a GET on the URI for what we're calling the RAS service. And a successful response indicates that it's supported, and now you can.

Continue to do the rest of the operations. We'll build a CPAD for specifically spoofing or requesting spoofing of a memory error that then the refugee client can use to put as a payload in a post to the action to send the URI to send the CPAD. So that will be the payload. Which then sends it to the BMC. BMC receives it, decodes it, understands that it is a request to spoof a memory error, uses the contents of the CPAD to actually create the seeper that then represents this memory error that has been spoofed and will include it or add it as an entry into the error collection.

That represents the abstraction of the corrector error queue, which is just a collection of entries in Redfish. At some point in time, the Redfish client can issue a get on the URI corresponding to the entry in the corrected error queue or the abstraction of the corrected error queue. Which then allows the reference clients to get the seeper. You can further do decoding of it. There's some fields in the header that you can use to then identify which analyzer out of many analyzers we can have in the data center can decode and process that seeper. That way, they can route it to the Proper analyzer, which then will identify it as a memory error in this particular case, produce a CPAT that says this error qualifies for an action like a soft post-package repair, which then the Redfish client can use and invoke for doing a post on the same Send CPAT URI.

Include the new payload, the new CPAD, as part of that. And so that will complete the round trip going back to the BMC. Our plans is to complete this and present our results sometime in Q1 of next year in the RAS API workstream. So if you want more details and are interested, I encourage you to join our sessions. To stay in the loop. And with that, I'll give it back to Drew for FMFM updates. All right. It's great to see you here. I'm going to talk to you a little bit about fleet memory fault management. So, next slide, please. Oh, where do I? I got the button. Okay. So, Basically, we started with DDR5 and we realized that every server fleet operator gathered different data for analyzing memory. But when we talk to the memory vendors, they know what they need. And so having a conversation with them and folks like Intel and AMD, we were able to come up with a common set of data that we want to collect.

Everywhere. And so we're looking to our CPU partners to gather this data in the future by default in the SEEPAs that are passed through the RAS API. And that will allow us to have rich data to diagnose memory failures and to send back to the memory vendors for them to help them. Improve their products. So you can see kind of a table of contents. I'm not going to read it, but we went through what do we want to collect and then how do we want to process it. And the key thing I'd like you to take away from this discussion on fleet memory fault management is that we are dividing the work.

Of analyzing memory errors between the people that made the memory and the people that have to respond to the memory failure. So that would be the memory vendors tell us they can look at a series of memory errors and from those errors infer the fault that's causing the memory errors to be exposed to a And then we pass information about the nature of that failure to the CPU vendor that can then look at their error correction codes and their SOC's ability to tolerate those errors and then propose the appropriate response. So it's really, you know, Someone came to me and said, You can't count memory errors and predict anything. I'm like, You're absolutely right, and counting is wrong. But analysis using the expertise of memory vendors and of CPU vendors is right, and it will give you far better results. And with that, I'm going to jump into the hardware fault management.

Management update. Well, actually, I'm going to hand it off to Anil for the first slide. Thank you, Drew. So a lot of good work has happened in this sub-project. You heard about FMFM and RAS API, CPAD. You wonder how that whole thing started. It started more than five years ago. when three companies, Intel, Facebook and Microsoft join together and say, hey, we need to really work through this whole RAS technology and see that industry unites together and come up with a more common interfaces and common technology terms.

Uh and John Leong is over here. We reached out to John and said, Hey, we need to start this subproject. John said, Yeah, sure, hardware management is the right place to uh join us and and start working on it. So that's how we started. And fast forward, now we are in uh twenty twenty five. Uh there is already already contribution done. Uh In 2023, where we released the 1.0 spec of hardware fault management, most of the focus there was: how do we collect the logs out of pen? And you saw that through VMC, right? So then we realized that, hey, we also collect the logs in PAN as well. So we need to expand.

Our requirement scope to include inband also. And that's where 1.5 that we contributed this year. We added the inband error handling requirements. And obviously, we are not stopping here. Then we realize: hey, all that we have a spec, but we still need to develop the recipes because these implementing RAS technology. And features is not easy. We need to put together recipes where we can define step by step how somebody can implement a RAS feature. So now we are working on these different scenarios, the use cases, PCI error handling, memory error handling, whatnot. And as a result of this whole Sub-project, we also realized that it's much complex than just writing a spec or writing a requirement. And a lot of different work streams have spun off from there. RAS API is one of them, FMF is another one. Selling data corruption started a separate work stream. So I will ask Drew now to Share some of the dynamics of our work, our sub-project, and how we are structuring and where we are today now. You might as well just stay up because we're going to go back to Neil in a second here. So basically, if a meteor were to hit,

This room, the world would like almost all the fault management experts in the world be gone. I have Rama and Mita and Evan. I'm looking out in the audience. It's amazing the community we've built. So we can't be in all the sub-projects. We have the central sub-project, hardware fault management, where this core group of people stays. Coordinate. We tell each other what's going on, we meet offline, and then we make sure that the sub-projects off of the main project stay aligned with what we're doing. And so, you know, in the main project right now, we've defined projects, as Anil mentioned, we define the requirements for in-band management.

We previously did out-of-band management. Now we're going to look at some scenarios. We walk through scenarios periodically to make sure that we're aligned. And then we'll be playing the next versions of the spec. And so, with that, I'll hand it back to Anil. Thank you, Duel. Yeah, so inband is uh interesting one. And um so as you can see this in this chart, the bottom part, right, the out-of-band error collection and then um taking all the way to the infrastructure and then doing the analysis part, that is something we put together and then uh the in-band part is on the top. So the idea is Is that when it comes to the hyper-cloud vendors or CSPs, or now there's a new cloud, new cloud concept introduced, right? So when it comes to the CSPs and infrastructure, whether the errors or information is propagated through in-band or out-of-band, we should see a very similar type of Structure of the data. And when we push the action, whether we push it through in-band or out-of-band, it should be really up to us how we deploy it. And that's where we kind of put together the thought process and then incorporate the in-band as well. So that's the primary theme here. If you drill down further, again,

You can, there's already a spec out there, requirements, with more details. So I will not go into the details here. But the key thing here is that if you look at the cloud part on the top, that's a view we want to look at. And define these requirements so that whether there's a vendor A. or B or any other vendors machine that we deploy in our fleet, we should be able to leverage on the existing infrastructure to collect the error information and issue an action. That's the main thing. And whether we can we do it through in-band or out-of-band is really abstracted out. So that's the thought process in defining this.

Architecture. Now, with a call to action, Drew, you want to finish it up? We just thought we'd keep you guessing who's going to say things. We have a fun team, and you hear some laughter. The community that we've built is wonderful. I think I was talking to Mita, and she's like, When I'm come to talk to you all, I don't feel alone anymore. Because people often, it's a fairly small group of people that deal with this type of problems at scale. And even at our own companies, you know, we don't always have people that we're working with that understand the problems we're solving. And so we help each other out. And it's a really Impressive partnership. We invite you to join us. And you can see the different work streams. All the ones listed here are open. You do have to sign the RAS API CLA to join us, but if you're willing to sign the CLA, you can join the group. And you'll see some people with a sticker for hardware fault management.

If you see this sticker, you'll know it's one of us. So please join us. We really would enjoy building this community and having a few more folks that look at the problems we look at. Okay, we'll just go on up. So what are your plans to get the The RAS API parts of specification back into the profiles that we discussed earlier? So we are working with DMTF representatives. So, first of all, we're going to build a prototype that we agree upon in the RAS API team.

And we're going to let folks kick the tires with kind of a software emulation, the proof of concept Carlos talked about. As we converge and we think that we've got an answer, we're going to work with our respective DMTF reps to bring it back to DMTF and go through the DMTF process for defining the profiles. Okay. Hey, Jackson. Oh, sorry, over here. Som sorry, Samer. No worries. So two questions. Is the proof of concept code going to be available within the CLA team or on the OCP? GitHub publicly. And then the second question, when you say working with DMTF to figure out some of the uh what needs to be done, is it on the Redfish side, uh MCTP, PLDM side or both? Well, I think we're gonna start with Redfish, but PLDM both of them. But well, well, the Redfish mapping is further along. And because we're s trying to make sure that whatever we do works for the for the the the upstream consumer and then once we figure that out then you know we'll work through the PLDM mapping as well and and there was another question I'm sorry about the code availability of code availability I think you know you know Carlos and I and Shibata and a few of us talked about this yesterday you know

I I think our intent is to upstream it and put it on GitHub. I mean, we'll just have a GitHub repo you can pull down and play with. Thank you. Okay, I have a very simple question. How can we make this faster and do we have a timeline that we can publish? Faster. But if we could have a few more shoulders pushing the spec along, you know, come on, we'll take the help. That's exactly I would like to also say that. Come and join to make it much faster. We are looking for experts and like-minded people to join and speed it up.

So Jixon, I'm gonna I'm gonna say something you're not gonna like. Um it's important to to go as fast as we can. It's more important to be right, right? And I I having a bad spec is not good for anybody. So like you know, I will say we debate a lot on this. But generally, once we've written something down, we're all standing behind it. And I think that's the key thing, right? So like speed is important. Trying to get done is important. That's why we're pushing the proof of concept. Getting is right the more important, right? Like I personally would like to look back in 20 years and be like, hey, that was useful. Right? So, anyway.

Yeah. I'd just uh add to that that I think we are uh uh spending amongst ourselves more than uh one full-time employee uh every week. So that's the maximum effort. And it takes a lot to bring everyone together. There's a lot of different methods, uh views, uh opinions, all of that. So it takes time. Let's move faster. But I share your impatience. I I have a quick question. The RAS API commands when I was seeing have you guys thought about doing a RAS API commands to MCTB binding spec? Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think that's what Drew was saying earlier, right? So I think our intent is to start with Redfish and then move to PLDM effectively, which would be then.

Over MCTP. Okay. Thank you. I think this last question. Naveen from AMD. There is analysis and then there is an action coming back from the vendor. So will this spec encompass the timelines or what is the time gap between the analysis and when the action should take place? Yeah, that's a great question. I don't think the spec would speak to that particularly because the time between an error going out and an action coming in is technically unbounded, right? Like the data center can, you know, there's lots of delays. Right. There's lots of.

There's lots of variability in the data center pipelines. I think that's partly why there was, Shibata had talked about, there's an urgency field in the CPAD, which basically is a priority that says, get this back to the thing sooner. But in general, I would say the intent is for every point. In the space, or every sort of entity in the pipe to be stateless, right? So we're not going to try and have, like, oh, I remembered that I sent an error and therefore I'm waiting for an action. Like, we don't want that. I sent an error, some later point, an action comes in and it gets acted on, right? I don't know, Drew or anyone if you want to say more. And I think, you know, there are two parts of the process.

Problem, right? There's the beauty of the RAS API, it's a standard way of piping things, but it doesn't define the pipeline. So every cloud provider is going to have to solve that problem in a cloud provider-centric way that works for them. But then the actual analysis, like how long does it take to run code? And generate the CPAD, you know, it just shouldn't take that long. These analysis processes shouldn't take 10 minutes. They should take a fraction of a second. So then it becomes mainly how fast can the pipeline be implemented.

We'll step outside and answer their questions.
