Pioneering with OCP Jabil's Building Blocks for the Modern Data Center

Hey guys, good afternoon. It's 4 o'clock, 4:10. Appreciate you hanging out for me. For those of you that don't know me, my name is Brad Rampelberg. I run sales for our intelligent infrastructure segment here at Jabel, and I'm going to talk a little bit about. Jabel and who we are, where we came from, and talk a little bit about building blocks. But really, what I want to talk about is OCP, Project Freedom, Facebook. So, you guys may not know this. You can tell by this, I had this particular hoodie back in 2007 when I started selling servers to Facebook, and I had this particular hoodie.

Shirt. I remember we had a QBR that we got over 90, and everybody got their own Facebook t-shirt. So we were pumped to get this shirt. So I just thought I'd bring this out for you guys. It sort of fits. So I'm going to keep this up just a little bit here. So, hey, for those of you that I'm going to do a little bit of a history lesson here, so it's 2025. So, I want to play a little game with you. This is like this game for the people at the wedding. So, if you were, everybody, raise your hand. Come on now. Let's go. This is participation. All right. If you were here last year, all right, keep your hand up. All right. If you were here, Five years ago, keep your hand up. All right, that was virtual. That's a little bit of a trick, 2020. All right, if you were here in 2015, was that 10 years ago? Keep your hand up. All right, I see one of the two guys, we used to work with them, so they don't count. All right, if you were here the very first OCP 2015,

2011, keep your hand up. All right, I got these three guys. So, hey, listen, so I was here during the very first OCP 2011. So, I told these guys I'm going to tell stories and they can't correct me. So, 2011, if you remember, Frank Frankofsky was the face of. Of OCP, big bearded guy. Frank hired me at Dell. And one of the stories I remember is: so I think it was 2008, and we were, I was headed up to the building, shoot, up California Avenue. And the very top of California Avenue was an old HP building. They turned it into houses now.

There and Frank is there. It's Friday afternoon, and Frank's sitting in the lobby. I said, Geez, Frank, what? Are you here for my meeting? He says, No, I'm here for a job interview. So, my boss was interviewing for a job at our best customer at the time. So, Frank had a great run, and hopefully, he's retired living on a West Texas ranch right now, which I think is. Where he is. But it was a fun time, it was a fun ride. So, behind Frank, right, there was really a couple of guys who think about, if you think about what an OCP stands for, cost-optimized kind of open source hardware. What I want to talk about is the guys behind Frank. So, Frank's the guy we all know and we all love. Jonathan Heiliger was the CTO, VP.

Of technical operations at Facebook at the time. And so I remember when he hired Frank and he hired a gentleman named Amir Michaels from Google, and he said, Hey, Brad, you're going to have a nice little three-year run selling hardware here. He said, Because we're going to start building our own hardware. So that was like as a vendor, as an OEM, I was at Dell at the time. I thought, well, that's interesting. But I don't love it, right? And then fast forward about six months later, I remember being in the same building, sitting down with Amir, and Amir says, Oh, by the way, this new project is project code name Freedom. And I said, Come on, Amir, Freedom, Freedom from Me? Freedom from Dell, Freedom from HP? Yeah, it was Project Freedom. So it was kind of fun to be in the room when that happened.

And a lot of the guys here were also in that room, so they know the pain and the story there. But I think what I really appreciated about what Jonathan was doing was he said, hey, listen, I don't need your Swiss Army knife, right? What I want is cost-optimized hardware, right? So if you think about it at that time, I think we had a compute tier, I think we had a memcache tier, I think we had a database tier. He said, listen, I'm gonna buy a whole bunch of these, and if I can just take that particular SKU or that particular workload or that particular application, optimize the hardware around that, I can save a bunch of money. And so, what I really appreciated about that was he said, hey, listen, this is the future, right? You guys as the OEMs are kind of in the past.

Well, I think that's kind of borne out to be true. I mean, yes, there's still places for the Dells and Lenovos, right? And the HP is kind of what I call them, the easy button, right? But at the end of the day, is really what we're doing here, we're about optimizing hardware for our workloads. Let me see if I can hit the right button here. Okay, so you guys are saying. Jabel, Jabil, how do I say it? What is it? We're the biggest little company you've never heard of. So think about Jabel as two guys named James and Bill. We munged their name together. It's called Jabel. Founded in Michigan in 1966. It'll be 60 years next year. But the reason I put This slide up is it's it really says, We've all been to those HR off sites, right, where you go around the room and you introduce yourselves and you say, Hey, you, you, it's like a team bonding. And you say, say three things about yourself: two things are true, and one thing's a lie. So I put it up here: two truths and a lie. I'll let you guys figure out which one's the lie. I'll tell you at the end of the slide. So, Jay will share.

750,000 L10 servers annually. You guys probably didn't know that. Jable ships 25,000 L11 racks annually. And Brad is a supermodel. Well, of course, we know it's number two, Brad, the 25,000 racks. Thank you. I got a little bit. Thank you. I got a chuckle. Thank you. All right. What is Jabel? Why are we here? We're going to get to building blocks. I promise you, we will get to building blocks. So, Jabel, we now know how to say it. I call this the smallest $30 billion company that you've ever seen, 29.8. I'm a sales guy, so I round up. So, the way I like to think about Jabel is: we've got three.

We've got a regulated segment, so think healthcare automotive. I've got a retail segment, so I like to think dishwashers and American girl dolls. And then we've got intelligent infrastructure, which I run sales for that business. They're about 10 billion each. Intelligent infrastructure is kind of who we are, what we care about. I mean, I guess we care about dishwasher. And American girl dolls, and we care about that other things for healthcare. But right now, intelligent infrastructure. So think server storage, AI, networking, data center infrastructure. 140,000 employees, 50 years of experience, 59, I think it's 60 coming up on next year. I think we're in 66. Those are some of the markets that we serve.

But that's why I put this slide up here: just talk about: hey, domestic base started in Michigan. So I think in this kind of, I don't, I'm not going to get up on my political high horse too much around tariffs, maybe a little bit, but domestic manufacture is not a bad place to be right now. Okay. So now we've taken. This $30 billion elephant, we segment it down into one $10 billion business unit. Okay, Brad, I got it. Where do you guys make things? Right here, I've got about eight sites here that are manufacturing sites. I've got a couple of design sites. San Jose is an MPI. I've got a mega site in Guadalajara. I think it's a million.

Or a million and a half square feet. But what's happening is with the current landscape, we're finding a lot of you guys in the room are saying, hey, oh, by the way, can you make something domestically? Right? Excuse me. So, put some, we're putting, since this slide has been published, we took space in Salt Lake City. There's some in Richardson. In Texas, and we've also crapped ground on 422,000 square feet up to 80 megawatts in North Carolina. So, the reason that I wanted to put this slide up was to talk about how we're different than OEMs or how we're going to be different than ODMs. So, if you, Jabel is, we're We come from this contract manufacturing background, right? So I don't think that's a bad word, right? So on one hand, I've got this business that says, listen, you give me a blueprint and I'm going to build it for you. On the other hand, I've got this nice little white box business that says, hey, I need this server, ship it to me. And really, what we're having a lot of success with is this piece in the middle that says, hey, listen, I want.

This thing, I always make the joke, I want a purple and quack like a duck. Or, hey, listen, I really want something, I want something unique, but I also want some joint design here. And then for us, you said to me, hey, Brad, that's great, I want it, but I want you to build it close to my customer. I've got over 100 sites worldwide. I can drop it in any one of those sites worldwide for you, right? The right volume. So also, you won't find that with an OEM. You're not going to go to Dell and say, hey, can you build something for me in Salt Lake City? They're just not going to stand up a site for you. They don't have sites for you. So I think that's where we can say we differentiate between something like an OEM or an ODM. We're in the middle where we can kind of meet you where you need to be.

That's why I wanted to put this slide up to talk about: hey, here's where we've got sites, here's where the intelligent infrastructure, we are kind of circling around these sites, but I've also got another 90 or 95 sites worldwide for you. All right. Hey, Brad, you told me that when you lured me in with the thing saying building. Blocks. I want to talk about building blocks. Okay, what does building blocks mean to you? So, what happens is you guys have come to us and said, hey, we love that server, but we want precision timing on the motherboard. Or, hey, we love that server, but we really want to put a GPU front end in it. Or, hey, we want a different storage.

We want a different storage. We don't want GPUs, we want storage on the front end. So instead of taking something all the way out to mass production, how do we take that to DVT, PVT, put it on the shelf for you guys, let you cost optimize it, let you work it around your workload? So when I go back to Jonathan's original premise. Of cost-optimized hardware, that's really where I love this building block strategy. Let me see if I can go to this. This is kind of the one that's kind of the most fun because this is the one that's the most technical. And then this is the one I get out of my depth in pretty quickly here. But really, what I want to talk about is the concept of when I see the top, I see motherboards, right? So, you can say to me, hey Brad, I'm all Intel, or hey, I'm all AMD. Really, what I want to talk to you guys about is ARM, where are you with your ARM journey? So, we'll get to that on the call to action, right? Are you an AMP here? Are you thinking about Grace? Are you thinking about one socket, two sockets? This middle tier here, right? So, if you can see this.

This nomenclature should make sense from a DC MHS standpoint. So we're big believers in the MHS system. We're on the design board there for the OCP. So we really love the concept of being able to say, here's my motherboard, here's my chassis and FNL or an SDNO. Hey, I'm an OR V3 house. And then said, hey, this is what I need on the front end. I need a U.2, E1.s. Now I want a GPU U.2 or E1.S. So this goes back to how do I optimize my solution? How do I bring you more solutions quicker and more cost-effectively? All right, I took some notes here. Let me just make sure I said everything I wanted to say here. Yeah, that's good. All right. Well, so what should you do now? This is going to be a little bit of a quick one today, guys, so I apologize about that.

Our booth is booth C12. Really, what I'm looking for is some product feedback from you guys. So, we haven't talked too much about GPUs. I do have a GPU front end. Really, Mike, what I have a question for you, and you guys can take this out to my folks. We're talking about: hey, are we doing inferencing on the edge? Are we doing PCIe out on the edge, right? Really, what I'm looking for is RTX 6000. Where are you guys on your journey with that? So, your call to action is to go out to my booth, talk to my guys about where you are with RTX 6000 Pro, please. The next thing I want you to talk about is where are you on Intel AMD? We all are very aware of what's going on within.

Intel and what's going on with AMD, but really your feedback to us is going to help my engineers decide what building blocks they want to build more quickly. What is above the line from, hey, we're all in on AMD, we really think that's the future, or hey, we really think Intel is coming back, right? And so we really think two-socket Intel is the way to go. And then the next thing I want to know is I'm going to double-click on this ARM journey, right? So we're having an internal debate on where we are with ARM, right? So it's like, hey, we think there is an alternate timeline for you, Loki fans that Ampure makes sense, or there's a workload that we think Ampure works for us for, or hey, we're all in on NVIDIA.

The 800-pound gorilla in the room, we get it, right? But we really love to see a Grace or a Vera CPU option. And so, where are you with that journey, right? It's like, hey, I don't want to do the port, I'm all in on Intel and AMD. So, that would be, or ARM is interesting. All right, and the last thing I'm going to leave you with is: David, unfortunately, is. In the room, but I'm going to say this anyway. So, our party is Wednesday night. You're all invited. Just tell them Brad sent you. Thanks, guys.
