Panel: EDSFF New and Upcoming Updates

Okay, Peter, you're first. How about we go ahead and get started here? Yeah, let me just get everyone started. So good morning. I'm Peter Troy. I manage our drive platform team at Peer Storage. And I'll talk a little bit about our journey with Keels. Drive platforms. So we embarked on this journey of large capacity drives more than 10 years ago. We started off by purchasing off-the-shelf SSDs, and we quickly found there's quite a bit of limitations or challenges with.

That form factor. So, U2 obviously is the dominant form factor for drives even till date. So, you know, we started hitting challenges in terms of thermal, which resulted because of power or airflow, because it's basically a brick, right? And then also the real estate side of things. The form factor itself just limits how much NAND chips we can put on the drives. And our business model, obviously, you know, everything beside NAND is sunk in costs. So we really wanted to get a form factor that we can maximize the amount of NAND placements we can put down and improve or maximize the power efficiency also.

What we settled was this what we call the U.2 long form factor. It's basically a drive form factor that can support a U.2 in this tray or carrier and just extend it longer. So this allows us to get to 300 terabyte, which is shown up here and is Uh shipping in the upcoming quarters at Peer. So when the standard communities, thanks to Ross and Anthony, when they reached out to Peer, I was very excited to share our knowledge and contribute to a standard form factor. Because even with this U. two, we're starting to hit limitations of cooling capability.

Of a beer board inside this tray. So I'll talk a little bit about those bullet points down below on how we contribute to an E2 form factor, which has been ratified, and some of its advantages. So here's a pictorial. Image of our U2 with 64 placement on the left. And what we did here was re-jigger it to E2 form factor, which also supports 64 NAN packages. Oversized, meaning that X, Y, and Z, it can tolerate.

Beyond the BJ178 package. So that allows for accommodating future four-terabit dies that need a little extra space, or 32 die stack, or even up to 64 die stacks. So if we need height, that can accommodate it. If we need XY space, that also can accommodate it. In addition, when we did this study, We didn't just take the smallest flash controller or the smallest amount of DRAM and did a placement study. We actually took the largest of the flash controllers that we have sampled through the industry, Gen 6 and beyond, along with making sure it supports up to nine DDR chips if people want to run that wide of a bus.

Or six, if needed. This picture shows six of them. And to the right, you see that grid of black boxes. Those are hold-up capacitors. So in our architecture, we heavily leverage on the holdup bank for power loss to flush data and complete what we have committed to. Our host. So we have a uniqueness where we need a lot of caps there. So we believe that if it fits our need, the majority of the industry should be okay with that. And here's our first working prototype, a P0 prototype in our lab right now. That obviously there isn't a server yet. Maybe Ross can help me out there. But we have Use the adapter to connect it to a Gen 4 or Gen 5 by 4 slot. And yeah, it's able to run IO. And here's a close-up image of the board. This is actually what's in here. So yeah, I'm looking forward to getting Just interopt with systems from the vendors. Great. Thank you, Peter. It's great to see your E2 drive, and I appreciate everybody's help on our E2 journey. With that, let's talk about a few things. So let's

Let's back up a little bit and it's like, well, why QLC? You know, it's been around a long time, and what's going on? So if you look at the storage pyramid, you see QLC sits between TLC and HDD. It has a number of very interesting properties that are coming into play in the market today. There's the increased storage chassis density, which is very important. Increased terabytes per watt. You know, improved performance per terabyte scaling. It enables power-based performance scaling. If you want more performance, turn up the power. So, this is what's driving all the QLC discussions.

In the market today. With that, how about we rewind a little bit? Let's go back a little over a year ago, 2024. The question that got posed, FMS is: what is the best form factor for capacity? And the considerations were capacity. Requirements, you know, how many NAND packages, which dies, how many dies per package? Where the goal was really, we need a unified high-capacity form factor at 128 terabytes and above. And you know, the concern is fragmentation.

None of us want fragmentation. And that was the call to action in 2024. And with that, I'm very happy to talk now about the high-capacity industry collaboration result. The result of all these discussions was E2, where E2 enabled high-capacity. Flash storage, leveraging EDSF and all the learnings and best attributes of both E1 and E3. They've been around a while. We learned a lot. And so we leveraged where it made sense and made improvements where it was needed. And so we had the benefit of backwards looking at the things we learned.

In the past. Quick overview: it has 64 or more NAND placements. It has the EDSF connector. That connector supports 80 watts. It's resource efficient. It has a single PCB with a thermally optimized enclosure. SFF 1042. It is all ratified now. There's a QR code if you want to go there. And what does this, so now what does this enable? This enables device capacity scaling to one petabyte and beyond. It enables dense chassis. You can have a chassis with 40 drives.

In it. Thermal, it can cool with low airflow. Performance, we talked about scaling with power and serviceability. And so now we have a form factor that going high capacity is boring rather than a very challenging engineering exercise of where can we get to. So now we're able to scale to the future. With that, let's talk a little since I want to talk a little bit about form factors. Now we have a very good pair of form factors to play with. We got E1S, it's your high-capacity, dense compute storage type of form factor.

I showed some trend focus numbers on the right with projected volumes. You see here how by 2029, it's over 40% of the volume from a unit's perspective is E1S. So very dense, high performance. It'll get talked about later. Everybody's talking about liquid. Cooling in E1S. The trends continue to grow there. What's next? Now we pair it with E2. So now we have a high capacity form factor for the future. So E1S and E2 really complement each other. If you want the high density, high compute type of form factor, you want the high capacity form factor.

We have the two of them to uh play with. And so it's a great pairing. And with that, Arthur. Thank you. Hi, I'm Arthur. I'm the product manager from Mores. So today I would like to uh introduce how uh currently uh from the cable and The cable suppliers, how can we support this kind of new EDSF platform? So, while we are designing the system to put the EDSF into the chassis, in the BP design, we were facing a lot of challenges, of course, including the SI, including the server.

And also, we can see every time most of the options, like right side, you can see the traditional BP, all the even we use the also gono connectors this solution, all the high-speed signal go through the bed plan. They cost the cost of. Of the BP is very expensive, the layout of the BP is very complicated. And every time from the Gen 4 to Gen 5, Gen 5 to Gen 6, we need to read inside the BP again. So that's a lot of time and resource consume. So currently, we already have quite a good solution to solve this issue.

The Oso Gono hybrid solutions. Okay, so we have a simple comparison from the left side to the right side. You can see in the left side, the transitional BP, the BP will block the airflow. And while we need to have some holes and to allow the airflow can go. Through that, and that makes the layout even more complicated, the trace even longer, and the SI is very poor. And then in the middle, we can see the orthogonal connector solution. But again, even we put down the BP from vertical to horizontal, but the high-speed signal we still need to go through the BP.

And go through the TA1000 and to also gono-connect it to the EDSF again, the loss is very huge. And quite often, because we need to solve this issue, we might need to add in the retirement into the system. And that will cause even more power consumption and more. So it looks like not a very good solution. The third one is a pure cable solution. Pure cable solution is my shooter for the server if you only have four or six EDSFF in the system. But for the storage server, when you have 30 to 40 devices, it looks like it's more complicated.

Especially when you're doing the assembly. Okay, so in the right side, the last one is currently why I mentioned the also hybrid solution in combined connector and also the cable solution. So let's see how it works. Okay, so here's the product diagram. Of this product. Uh from the right side, you can see from the host, we have the high-speed signal and go to the TA172 cylinder connector to the EDSFF. But in the meantime, we also have the sideband go through the gold finger to the small backpack, and then we have the device control signal.

and the power from the bedpan to the EBS FF. So that can help the because uh B P only uh in charge for the um uh sideband and also the power. So we can you can use a very cheap uh just four layer FR4 to make this BP and uh uh uh you don't need to Spend a lot of money there. In the right side, you can see we have a lot of different kinds of configuration available, suitable for E2, E1, and also E3. And here is even more clear the layout for references. So we can see we have.

The clock signal from the cable soldering joint to the go finger. And then we have again the clock from the go finger to the EDSF. Besides offline, we also have the power and ground that's also supported from the VP. Okay, so this. This is the how the concept looks like. And the reason we need to have the uh clock uh go through the BP and then goes up is uh uh for example if you have uh one cable is uh by sixteen spring into A E B S F F and each one is by two channel but each EBSFU will need to have a clock informa uh clock signal. Of course, I don't I cannot have uh uh uh a clock signal from the by C SIN MCL to EBSO directly. So go through uh the BP uh when we deliver one clock signal goes through uh uh To the pedal car, and then go to a BP, go through a clock buffer, spray into A, you can perfect solve this issue. Okay, so that's the concept of this one. And we can support very high density. The minimum pitch of this solution is just 9.3 millimeters. So if you go.

With a 9.3 millimeter, we can support up to forty-four uh uh devices E three. Okay? Uh besides of the very high density and other advantages, we can save a lot of cost, uh a lot of space. So in the bottom you can see there's uh TA one thousand and two, uh the Osogono connector. Uh and you can see the width uh just even one C is uh 44.3 millimeter already. And if you want to use a 2C version and the space is uh uh the width is even increased uh to 59.7. But no matter use one C or 2 C in the also our also hybrid solution.

We keep the width only in 29 millimeters. So you can save some space and you don't need to readjust your BPO multiple location just when you change the EBSFF. Okay. And the flexibility also here is not only can support The E3 in all E2 in the 2U server. If you want to install E3 in one U server, you can also can perfect fit. You just need to turn the small BP 90 degree. And also in the button left, you can see how this device can also support the E2. That's how it looks like.

Okay. Here is, as I just mentioned, we already have a lot of different configurations to fit your need. So you can have the by A spray into four EDSF, each one is by two channel, or by A spring into two, each one is by four channel, or you go with a by A to uh to C, each one is by A channel or whatever. That's uh uh many different kind of configuration uh available and already mass production for your selection. And then uh the very quick summary uh of the benefit. The first thing is uh this uh topology is aligned with Intel Gen 6 topology and you can save a lot of cost at the VP. You don't need to use 12 layer ultra low loss material, you can just use a four layer FR4 and you don't need to retimer etc. active device layer. And this BP is very simple and you can reuse from On current gen 5 to gen 6, or even gen 7, you don't need to relay out the BP and for SAB that you can support no matter E1, E2, E3. So you can just have one BP in one new server with E1, you can also use that in two servers with E2 or E3. Let's save a lot of time in your future.

Part of the developer, and you just need to have a new version of the cable from Gen5 to Gen 6 or Gen 7, and you are all set. Okay. The cooperation I think currently for the challenge is still the PCI Gen 7 because most of the, we can see nominated. It looks like the Gene 7 will go with the pedocar as solution. So, how can the cable connector here to support the PGI Gen 7 version EDSF will be the one of the challenges? Another one is Ross just mentioned the device space already.

uh defined up to eighty watts, but currently we only have six pins uh for the uh power six pins uh times one point one M times twelve volts only seventy nine point two. So maybe in short term we we not facing this challenge, but it's still uh something we need to consider when the s uh EDSF speed Getting higher and higher, and the bandwidth is more and more power consumption. How can we continue to use current form filter to support this up to 80 watt wall consumption? Or we need to have something else. So in the end, we have a boost in C.

Fine, we'll come to our booth and we have some sample can demo to you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Okay, I get the fun conversation. What's next in EDSFF? By the way, my name's Anthony Constantine. I am the resident troublemaker. Think like that. So, sounds about right. Yeah, I think that's about right. Okay, so just to talk year and review on EDSFF over the last year. Obviously, we've talked about the U2 form factor, so I'm not going to touch too much on that. But in addition, we've had EDSFF connector changes. So, I don't know.

If a lot of you know this, but the SFFTA 1002, which is our connector for EDSFF, is actually also used by the OCP network guys, the OCP NIC 3.0. And that connector, there were some requests that came in to improve 1002 in order to go support that. So we made some improvements there. But in addition to that, our thought. Connector only supported E1. And we thought, you know what, it'd be good to also support E2 and E3 for those one connector topology basically systems. So we added that into the spec.

We also, I think Arthur just touched on it, we have new and updated cable specifications. Both the SFFTA 1035 as well as the SFFTA 1016 support this two-connector topology, basically going through like this hybrid orthogonal connector, which does reduce the insertion loss, reduces the, lets us go faster. Essentially. Some spec cleanup because the author is not good at writing specs, so sometimes we need to improve what we've done. And that will be a constant process, obviously. And in addition, the most recent changes to the E1.s and E1.l spec was we made some updates to for the power. Everyone, we've had this reference power spec in the back of the form factor specifications for the last several years, and it's been causing a lot of confusion out there, and we needed to finally fix that confusion.

So, really, the power is up to the system that you're running in and as well as what the SSD can do and can cool. So, what we did is we basically redid that power section to call it out based on what the connector can support. The connector can support up to 79.2 watts. We ended up changing the spec to basically call that out. Everything else is going to be based off of your device thermals and what you need from that perspective. So we did a lot of work over the last year. It was actually a pretty busy year. So we're done. Yay. Until tomorrow. Until tomorrow.

So, what are the next problems? Well, the first one is liquid cooling. Yeah, I know. This is going to be a fun slide, and I'll explain why in a minute. So, you know, really, liquid cooling is going to drive changes into all these form factor specifications. We need to figure out how to effectively have a cold place. Attached to E1S, all the different form factors. And ideally, we need one solution, right? We don't want SSD manufacturers doing their own thing. We don't want host manufacturers having multiple SSD solutions. No one wins here, right? And the famous quote I get every, at least once a week, no one wants yet.

Another form factor. So, what do we have to have in place from an industry perspective? You know, ideally, air-cooled versus air plus liquid. You know, we need to identify those contact surfaces and dimensional changes. So, I think I sent you this slide like mid-August, right? Yes. And then September happened. So, what are we doing about this? So, September 8th, we had an, I think it was after FMS, I think we started talking and said, you know what, we need to accelerate on the liquid cooling work. There's a lot of work happening here, there's a lot of diverse.

In the ecosystem, we need to bring everyone together. So, September 8th, we had an OCP storage call. There were three excellent presentations there, all talking about E1S, 9.5. So, great, we're on the same form first. 66 people on the call. 66 people on the other side. Yeah. And we had three ideas for how to do liquid. Cooling on E1.S. So a bunch of us got together on the side and had a discussion. How do we all sing kumbaya on this, get all together, and figure it out? So we had probably more sponsors than I've seen on a lot of ones.

Project starts. So in September 19th, we got that project kicked off. We had, I think, eight or nine sponsors on it. And we started work. And then, you know, a few days later, we had a first draft of the spec. And that spec's actually in process. We're looking at it right now, getting some feedback in. Hopefully, we close it. That feedback pretty soon. And then the following week, we introduced the three-spec work. So, this is actually a great point about how OCP, how our standards bodies, how all our community works together, right? Identify a problem, go solve that problem.

Run fast, you know, trip along the way sometimes, and then you know, eventually we get to a holistic solution. So, this has been an excellent example of how our companies can work together to come up with something really quick and put stuff out there. So, the other problem. That I want to talk about is PCIe 7. All of us SSDs connect through PCIe MVME interface. And right now we're at 6.0, and the 7.0 spec's been released for probably over a year now, I think, for base. And it's going to be challenging, right? It's going to have Signal integrity challenges. Your Nyquist frequency, which is basically the root frequency you're signaling at, is going to go up to 32 gigahertz. You're going to have more transmission line loss, crosstalk, et cetera. We need to go solve this problem. We need to go start working on this problem sooner rather than later, because it's going to be hard.

You know, again, this is going to be all of us coming together: system, connector, device vendors, all figuring out how to go and solve this problem. It's going to be budget conversations in terms of insertion loss. It's going to be: hey, are we using the right topologies in place? What additional learnings do we pick up along the way? Because we're not the only ones out there trying to. Figure out PCIe 7.0. And really, it's going to drive a lot of changes into all of our specifications, right? We need to change the base spec of basically the connector spec 1002. We'll need to change the device spec 1009. 10.16 has just been opened on it for 6.0, and I think we need to reopen.

Up in 1035 for 7.0 as well. And there will be more that kind of pop into place. So we have a lot of work ahead of us for the next while to go figure out this problem. So, really, my call to action here is: you know, we've got a lot of work, let's continue. Solving these problems, and let's keep running fast. We need this device and system partnership. This is a great partnership we've had between OCP, where we're able to bring in all the system people, we're able to bring everyone together and have these discussions, and then we can go figure out how to standardize it in SFF. Let's continue this work.

Let's continue going fast. If you want to get involved, I think I saw I've heard Mike Allison pop up at least three times today, so talk to Mike if you don't know how to get involved, or talk to one at Ross or Lee. And if you're interested in the specifications, hit one of the QR codes. I think that's it. We're open for questions now. There's a mic here. There's a mic here. Also for the panel after this, if I'm reading everything right, please go to the back and get your mic on. So with that, any questions? So a couple of days ago there was a talk by Solid and I'm showing there about liquid cooled SSD. Is that that's part of this program that you talk about? Development of that, is that correct? I don't think we want to come about any specific products. What we do want to say is there's a standard under development in SFF now. The target is those drives work with both air and liquid. And we are working hard at finishing that up.

And we believe with the changes in SFF that we will be successful for air, liquid, and backwards compatible. And one comment I would like to extend on that is that, on that, as the list of sponsors for the E1S specification, SolidIME was one of the sponsors. I saw that up there. Unfortunately, the standard is not done yet, but we're working hard. Yep.

One thing that we're doing is trying to make a backwards-compatible air-cooled, which also supports liquid cooling. So, in effect, we're not adding anymore, we're changing one of the capabilities in each of the form factors to be able to support either type of cooling system. And so, that might be. The choice for flexible systems in the future. Yes, yes. Thank you, John. Over on this side. Hi. Um with the removal or the the upcoming removal of the recommended power levels from the EDSFF specs and the continued, you know.

uh power growth with higher performance as PC Express goes faster and faster. How does I guess SNIA um view the or the industry how do you guys all in a independently view the way that we manage backward compatibility with legacy system Systems by default behavior for a sort of generic drive in terms of power. So, how are we going to manage the backwards compatibility for some of these newer features? Right. So, from a liquid, okay, so from a liquid cooling perspective, So when we hopefully eventually publish the E1S specification as well as the other specifications, they will have changes that are not, you know, like if you took your older drive, it would not necessarily work in a liquid-cooled system.

So, but they will be backwards compatible. You can plug them into an older system, and that is the intent of it. And I think a lot of the changes, you know, going to 7.0, that change should be backwards compatible as well. You know, everything that we look at has backwards compatibility implications. And we want to make sure that we will work in. At least the device, from a device standpoint, we will work in older systems. That answer your question? I'm thinking specifically about power levels, right? Older systems might have used the recommended power levels that were published in the EDSFF specs to design the chassis and whatnot, right? So those older systems may be expecting drives.

to plug into them to conform to those power levels. But now the answer to that one is in NVMe they have methods of managing power and it's always been the expectation that the system manages the power. So the system needs to tell the device set the device up properly. So, if it doesn't set up the device properly, anything can happen. As long as it sets up the device properly, we're okay. Yeah, NVMe PowerStates manages that pretty well. I see there are more questions. Unfortunately, we are out of time. So, I am sorry.
