YouTube:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PDcIkTGk_KY
Text:
Hi, everyone. I'm Casey Morrison with Astera Labs and today I'm excited to present our portfolio of connectivity solutions that unlock the full potential of data-centric systems based on Compute Express Link technology. Specifically, our Aries CXL Smart Retimers and Leo CXL Memory Accelerator SoC platform. Astera Labs is the first in the industry to develop purpose-built CXL-based SoC technology for increasing bandwidth, reducing latency, and expanding memory capacity in data center and enterprise systems. As the industry's first CXL 2.0 SoC solution to implement the CXL.memory protocol, the Leo CXL Memory Accelerator platform allows a CPU to access and manage CXL-attached memory overcoming bandwidth bottlenecks and capacity constraints.

When configured as a CXL Type 3 device, Leo supports the expansion of memory attached to a processor and pooling or sharing of memory between multiple processors to enable the efficient utilization of centralized memory resources at scale while improving overall system performance. The Leo platform of ICs and standard form factor modules increases overall memory capacity up to 2 terabytes, with bandwidth up to 32 gigatransfers per second per lane, all while maintaining ultra-low latency and providing server class RAS features for robust and reliable operation of the server fleet. In this video, I'm going to demonstrate Compute Express Link interoperation between a root complex from Intel, a retimer from Astera Labs, and a CXL prototyping platform.

Here we're using Astera Labs Solstice 3U riser card, which is designed to expand a 32-lane PCIe slot on the system board into two x16 add-in card slots supporting PCIe Gen 5 and CXL devices. This card features two Aries CXL smart retimers, enabling two x16 add-in card slots.

In this topology, we have one Solstice 3U riser card plugged into an Intel next-generation server platform. In the add-in card slot, we have connected a CXL prototyping platform. The root complex in this topology is an Intel Sapphire Rapids processor, which supports PCIe Gen 5 and CXL 1.1 interconnects. The end-to-end CXL link is formed between the Sapphire Rapids processor, the Aries CXL smart retimer, and the CXL prototyping platform.

To check the status of the CXL link, we can use the Aries Python SDK and tools running on the host system. On the left, we can see the system reporting that the link is up in the L0 state and in CXL mode. Here, we can see that the link has correctly formed as a x8 link width running at eight gigatransfers per second.

On the right, the Aries Python SDK shows the status of each lane in the link, including the detected CXL protocol, signal quality parameters like figure of merit, link training results, and other real-time diagnostics. This concludes our demonstration of a fully formed CXL link between a root complex, retimer, and CXL prototyping platform. Together, Aries CXL smart retimers and Leo CXL memory accelerators, not only unlock the many exciting benefits of CXL technology, but also offer built-in deep diagnostics and advanced telemetry that are key for data center fleet management and also ensure high reliability and system uptime. When you're ready to design and deploy CXL capabilities into your next product or system, Astera Labs has the purpose-built solutions to make that happen. Visit asteralabs.com for more information.

